As climate change intensifies, industrial companies will need a new approach for developing sustainable products and services.
The industrial sector—including automotive, machinery, and semiconductors—has never hesitated to explore new businesses. It has already produced some of the world’s most advanced technological innovations, such as leading-edge electronics and state-of-the-art transport systems. Now, it is deeply enmeshed in developing solutions for one of the world’s most pressing problems: climate change. Industrial companies provide some of the most important green products, components, and services, such as electric vehicles (EVs) and wind turbines. Much of the sector’s ongoing R&D focuses on sustainable solutions.
But which green opportunities should industrial companies prioritize as they seek to build new businesses? The stakes are high because a bad bet could jeopardize not only the bottom line but also—by diverting R&D funds from more promising solutions—efforts to control global warming. Although most industrial companies are accustomed to navigating uncertainty during product develop­ment, the sustainability market combines multiple challenges: immature technologies, evolving regulations, a lack of clarity about market size, and rapid changes in required capabilities. These issues may be particularly problematic during the early stages of R&D, when companies contemplate their options and allocate resources.

To provide guidance during this critical period, we reviewed the business case for sustainable offerings and the potential obstacles to their success. These insights allowed us to develop a new five-step frame­work that can help industrial companies identify the best green business opportunities and chart a path forward. Our framework involves assessing the value prospects, identifying enablers, basing priorities on climate impact and technological maturity, aligning with future policies and regulations, and defining a strong business plan.

The business case for sustainable offerings
Many businesses and government leaders are heeding the call to limit global warming to an increase of 1.5° Celsius above preindustrial levels—the target established in the 2015 Paris Accord. More than 1,800 companies have already set decarbonization goals inspired by the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi), and these may necessitate changes in their operations, manufacturing processes, or upstream and downstream supply chains.

Equally important, the emphasis on sustainability is encouraging industrial companies to explore new opportunities in green products and services—either adaptations of existing offerings or entirely new ones. Their efforts usually follow one of these patterns:

Leveraging technology from existing products. A turbo machinery manufacturer, for example, used technologies from its existing compressors (mostly for oil and gas customers) to build entirely new green heat pumps that multiple industries can use.
Adapting existing infrastructure. A chemical reactor manufacturer, for instance, reconfigured reactors originally used for nonsustainable production to create green methanol and green kerosine.
Leveraging existing strengths. A producer of combustion engines, for example, decided to leverage its existing competencies and customer relationships to create new hydrogen-based offerings that complemented its classical combustion-based drive systems. By doing so, it established a niche within the fields of electrolyzer and fuel cell production.
The emphasis on sustainability is encouraging industrial companies to explore new opportunities in green products and services—either adaptations of existing offerings or entirely new ones.

Even more green offerings will enter the market over the next few years to meet the 1.5° Celsius target, and sales of existing sustainability solutions will probably increase. One hundred percent of road transport, for example, must be electrified to achieve net-zero emissions, and all low- and mid-temperature industrial processes must be fossil free by 2050.1 Over the past two years, this prospect has led to an eightfold increase in the number of OEMs committed to decarbonizing their supply chains, and this number could continue to surge.2

The value of sustainable solutions is already impres­sive. The total sustainability value chain of transport, for instance, could be valued at $2.3 trillion to $2.7 trillion by 2030. As the sustainability market continues to grow, investors are expected to funnel an additional $4 trillion into creating and scaling up new decarbonization businesses by 2025.

The Titanium Economy Book cover
The Titanium Economy
Read the book
So green opportunities already abound for industrials. Consider green steel. Demand already exceeds supply. Emissions across the steel value chain account for approximately 10 percent of global CO₂ emissions,3 yet only a few companies have invested in producing low-carbon steel. Global demand for it is expected to increase from about 15 metric tons in 2021 to around 200 metric tons by 2030. At that point it would represent some 10 percent of total steel demand—and that could rise to 25 percent by 2040. If supply doesn’t rise soon, companies may not get enough green steel to keep the manufacture of sustainable products on track.

Although industrial companies are eager to advance their sustainability ambitions, the sector is new to them. Certain factors, including the following, might influence their perceptions about the best path forward and potentially hold them back from taking rapid action:

Unclear market size and growth rates. Some green products and services have just emerged, so it is difficult to predict their future revenues. Carbon capture technologies, for example, are now a niche market, but many analysts expect demand to surge. The market for these tech­nologies is very likely to become substantial at some point, but the exact size is hard to estimate.
Early-stage technologies. Many sustainable products are in a very early stage of development. It still isn’t clear whether many of them will be both technologically and financially feasible on a large scale: researchers still have many questions to answer and obstacles to overcome. The sustainable production of hydrogen, for instance, clearly requires new and more efficient electrolyzers. But R&D has yet to identify the best technology for the purpose or the type of infrastructure required to support them.
A lack of clarity about the required competencies, facilities, and product characteristics. Companies are still learning which features will give green products unique selling propositions. Consider battery cells. Some machinery companies are interested in providing new coating mechanisms for this market, but the specific requirements for next-generation batteries are still unknown. With so much uncertainty about products, it is also difficult to predict which skills employees will need, which materials must be sourced, and which facilities will be essential (for instance, whether large plants will be needed).
Changing regulations. Rapidly evolving sustainability regulations could eventually have a significant impact across industries. Until companies have more detail about which, when, and where regulations will apply, they cannot be sure that potential products and services will meet future guidelines.
Charting a path forward
If industrial companies develop perceptions that inhibit their drive to pursue sustainability oppor­tunities, they may have difficulty striking the right balance between their core business and new green growth. Leaders may struggle to allocate time and resources between these competing imperatives because management attention and funding are always limited. In any case, core businesses deliver stronger short-term returns than new ones, and leaders may have difficulty making a case to divert resources from these more profitable lines.

Such issues require immediate attention because sustainability is the business opportunity of the century, and really the only way of future-proofing any industrial company. Our new five-step approach can help change companies’ perceptions, mitigate risk, and allow for more accurate evaluation of sustainability opportunities.

Step one: Assess the value prospects
Within the industrial sector, the number of green opportunities may seem overwhelming because they encompass so many products and services. McKinsey’s knowledge of developing technologies, regulations, and customer demand leads us to estimate that $9 trillion to $12 trillion in sustainability investment opportunities will emerge by 2030. To gain greater clarity about the market, companies might benefit from identifying specific investment themes within different sectors and assessing the value for each theme.

We followed this approach by mapping opportunities for industrial companies along 11 customer sectors: agriculture and land and forest management, buildings, carbon management, consumer goods, hydrogen, industrials (aluminum, cement, chemicals, mining, and steel), oil and gas, power, transportation, waste, and water. For each sector, we identified investment themes, such as carbon offsets, the electrification of vehicles, green cement, and renewable power (Exhibit 1). By providing more clarity about the potential for value, such segmentations can help leaders not only to prioritize their opportunities but also to build support for new green ventures.

Exhibit 1
Eleven high-potential value pools could be worth more than $12 trillion of yearly revenues by 2030 as the net-zero transition advances.
We strive to provide individuals with disabilities equal access to our website. If you would like information about this content we will be happy to work with you. Please email us at: McKinsey_Website_Accessibility@mckinsey.com
One sustainability investment company looked at opportunities related to each of the investment themes that we identified. As part of its assessment, the investor examined the dynamics and the cost of building a new business. It eventually decided to fund a hydrogen-based, zero-carbon steel production company that became the world’s first large-scale fossil-free steel plant. This facility is expected to produce five million tons of zero-carbon steel annually by 2030.

Step two: Identify important technology and infrastructure enablers
While market value is a major consideration, companies cannot set priorities based solely on potential revenue; they must also examine their existing infrastructure and capabilities to narrow the prospects. The first consideration is whether their existing products can support sustainability applications or be adapted to do so. Next, companies should determine if any factors—including infra­structure, the supply chain, the customer base, and the geographic footprint—might give them an edge.

Companies should determine if any factors—including infrastructure, the supply chain, the customer base, and the geographic footprint—might give them an edge.

After companies complete the internal assessment, they should review, with fresh eyes, the opportunities they identified in the first step. Some of the most promising ones may not be a good option for their business because they would require the acquisition of new skills or facilities. Likewise, companies may discover that their capabilities are a strong fit for an opportunity they had not originally considered.

All businesses will reach a different conclusion after the internal review, since they all have unique strengths and weaknesses. Consider machinery players that manufacture components such as valves and engines. Our value analysis found that these companies could find multiple sustainability opportunities, although the best vary, depending on the area of specialization. With batteries, for instance, the total value at stake for machinery players ranges from $70 billion to $80 billion (Exhibit 2). Machinery companies that specialize in drive technology might achieve the best results by focusing on electrode coaters. Those involved with robotics and automation might win by concentrating on cell or pack assembly tools.

Exhibit 2
The best sustainability opportunities for machinery companies will vary by area of specialization.
We strive to provide individuals with disabilities equal access to our website. If you would like information about this content we will be happy to work with you. Please email us at: McKinsey_Website_Accessibility@mckinsey.com
One multinational company that produces large-bore diesel engines and turbomachinery identified more than 40 potential green business opportunities, in areas such as energy storage, green-energy production, heat pumps, hydrogen, and synfuels. By evaluating these opportunities in relation to infra­structure, competitive positioning, and customer access, the company pinpointed two options that offered the greatest chance of success.

Step three: Base priorities on climate impact and technological maturity
The third assessment step focuses on two major considerations in combination: the climate benefits and the technological maturity of each potential opportunity (Exhibit 3). To assess the impact on climate, companies can use tools such as McKinsey’s Catalyst Zero, which typically determines the baseline sustainability metrics of a company, product, or process. The tools then predict how different solutions could improve these metrics. To assess the maturity of a technology, companies can draw on their proprietary research, as well as insights from analytical tools. For instance, McKinsey’s Zero Carbon Product tool helps companies determine the abate­ment prospects of a technology by evaluating its level of maturity.

Exhibit 3
Sustainability opportunities may be assessed based on technological maturity and climate impact.
We strive to provide individuals with disabilities equal access to our website. If you would like information about this content we will be happy to work with you. Please email us at: McKinsey_Website_Accessibility@mckinsey.com
Just as capabilities may differ, companies may have varying attitudes about the climate impact and technological maturity they want. Those with a high risk appetite may be more likely to favor opportunities in emerging technologies that could deliver the most promising returns. Others may be less comfortable with immature technologies, even if their potential sustainability impact is high.

Step four: Align with future policies and regulations
Many regulations, such as those related to the EU Fit for 55 program and the US Inflation Reduction Act, could act as catalysts by creating incentives for the development of green products or providing economic benefits to companies that cut emissions. Companies should follow regulatory developments and consider how current or future policies might affect their strategies. That holds true for any project across industries, of course, but it is particularly important for green businesses because regulations are often missing, nascent, or rapidly evolving.

Companies can use analytical tools and research insights from diverse sources to assess how future guidelines could evolve. They might, for example, consult the Inevitable Policy Response (IPR), a consortium that conducts research and models scenarios. The IPR includes groups (including the Carbon Tracker Initiative and the Climate Bonds Initiative) with many different perspectives. It also offers a range of applications that can help companies map potential regulatory considerations and remain in compliance with guidelines.

Step five: Define a strong business case and plan
Before executing a green strategy, companies could benefit from developing a complete business plan, including a business case with a five- to ten-year outlook. Again, this advice is standard for any company, regardless of product or sector, but may be particularly important for green products because of the heightened uncertainty. When developing business plans, companies may benefit from asking some basic questions, including these:

What are the company’s ambitions—financial and otherwise? Are these game-changing ambitions?
What is the current demand? Can the company captivate demand before scaling?
What is the market sweet spot? Can the company create a cost advantage with new technology?
How can the company fill competence gaps, and can it do so while scaling the business?
In which five to ten areas (for instance, operations, partnerships, and recruiting resources) should the company double down?
How can the company define and track success during implementation?
Some companies might benefit from testing the business case externally by presenting it on a capital markets day or by sharing it with an advisory board.

A European equipment and machinery supplier for automotive OEMs followed all five steps when it looked for new green growth opportunities. After examining multiple options, the company identified near-term growth opportunities for battery cell manufacturing: a revenue potential of €900 million to €1.6 billion by 2030. Internal capabilities, infra­structure, the maturity of the technology, the impact on climate, and regulations were all considered. The company identified more than 80 longer-term opportunities and narrowed them down to three by taking the same considerations into account. In addition to identifying the essential resources, such as employees and capital expenditures, the company created a detailed business plan that included a timeline and assigned responsibilities.

Identifying the best green opportunities may require a new strategy of the kind we have outlined here. The rest of the product development journey will be more familiar to most companies: the stages often include establishing proof of concept, beta testing, forming partnerships, and scaling up the business. If a company has thoroughly assessed its green opportunities through our five-step process, these additional stages will most likely proceed more smoothly, and the eventual returns on investment will be optimal.


The global green technology and sustainability market size is projected to grow from $16.50 billion in 2023 to $61.92 billion by 2030, at a CAGR of 20.8%... 

Grand View Research Logo
Search...
Toggle navigation
GVR Report cover
Green Technology & Sustainability Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report By Component (Solution, Services), By Technology (IoT, Digital Twin, Cloud Computing, Blockchain), By Application, By Region, And Segment Forecasts, 2023 - 2030
Report ID: GVR-4-68039-945-7Number of Pages: 100Format: Electronic (PDF)
Historical Range: 2017 - 2021Industry: Technology
Report SummaryTable of ContentsSegmentationMethodologyRequest a FREE Sample Copy
Report Overview
The global green technology & sustainability market size was valued at USD 15.85 billion in 2022 and is expected to expand at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 22.7% from 2023 to 2030. The industry is expected to grow as environmental awareness and concerns about global warming rise among organizations and individuals. Green technology uses various forms of sustainable energy to safeguard the environment. Solar panels, LED lighting, wind energy, vertical farming, electric vehicles, and composting are a few examples of green technologies.

Asia Pacific green technology & sustainability Market size and growth rate, 2023 - 2030
To learn more about this report, request a free sample copy

Furthermore, several countries worldwide employ green technologies to manage and recycle waste from industries and households. Green technology also aids enterprises in reducing emissions, conserving water, reducing waste, and using less energy than traditional technologies. These advantages of sustainable technology have had a substantial impact on its global adoption.

Nations worldwide are focusing on technological improvements to deliver more sustainable solutions. With the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, the EU aims to speed up its green transition to lessen its reliance on Russian fossil resources. For instance, the European Commission is expected to propose a new legislative package to increase renewable energy use and energy savings, albeit it will continue to rely on gas imported from other nations. It will also shorten the license processing time for renewable energy projects, which will not exceed one year.

Solar and wind farms bear a high capital cost of construction and installation. On the contrary, they are inexpensive to manage because their fuel is free and maintenance is minimal; thus, most of the money is spent on developing technology-based products or solutions. Carbon footprint management, air quality monitoring, and air and water pollution monitoring are just a few applications where cutting-edge technologies like Internet of Things (IoT) sensors and analytics need significant maintenance costs. For example, when it comes to air quality monitoring software, which is used to analyze and test air quality parameters, detecting chemical and biological components from the air necessitates advanced cutting technologies, such as gas sensors and PCR-based biosensors, which are both expensive.

The escalating COVID-19 pandemic situation worldwide has had a significant impact on the green technology and sustainability business. Over the forecast timeframe, altering consumer choices and behavior due to the changing worldwide pandemic environment will have a significant impact on the green technology and sustainability market. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic in March 2020, putting numerous countries on lockdown. Reduced carbon emissions, improved solar energy output, increased rainfall received, and growing use cases of various technologies throughout various industrial verticals may result in expanded green technology use. Furthermore, a greater emphasis on environmental protection across many businesses will benefit the market for green technology and sustainability.

Component Insights
In terms of component, the solution segment led the market in 2022 and accounted for over 68.0% share of the global revenue. Solution and services constitute the component section. The solution segment is further expected to account for a more significant market share during the forecast period. The environment has been continuously exploited since the advent of globalization and innovative advancement.

Emerging technologies provide new opportunities for green technology and sustainable development, considering social, economic, and environmental factors. As a result, increasing awareness of technology's detrimental influence on the environment is a primary driver of green technology and sustainability solutions adoption across verticals worldwide, propelling the green technology and sustainability market forward.

For instance, in May 2023, the Germany-based global software provider, SAP, introduced the ‘GreenToken’ technology for energy companies operating in India. GreenToken is a SaaS-based solution for industries catering to operations associated with bulk-traded raw materials. The technology addresses important factors such as carbon footprint, certified sustainability, zero child labor, and fair-trade labor.

Report Coverage & Deliverables
PDF report & online dashboard will help you understand:
Competitive benchmarking
Historical data & forecasts
Company revenue shares
Regional opportunities
Latest trends & dynamics
Request a Free Sample Copy
The Grand Library - BI Enabled Market Research Database
Click on image to enlarge
Technology Insights
The IoT segment led the market in 2022 and accounted for over 41.0% share of the global revenue. Technology in the green technology & sustainability market includes the Internet of Things (IoT), AI and analytics, cloud computing, digital twin, blockchain, and other technologies. A relatively new concept, green computing, is reducing energy consumption and carbon footprint by manufacturers, data centers, and end-users by designing and manufacturing computers, chips, and other technology components to reduce carbon emissions.

Choosing sustainably sourced raw materials, eliminating electronic waste, and promoting sustainability through renewable resources are all part of green computing. Several firms are also utilizing blockchain to make energy networks more accessible and sustainable by encouraging real-time data exchange. Energy-intensive cryptocurrency mining has increased carbon emissions, and blockchain has the potential to drive green technology innovation.

The blockchain technology category is predicted to have a very significant market size during the forecast period. The ability of the cloud to provide real-time remote access to data via sensors, satellite photos, and the weather has contributed to this expansion. According to the World Economic Forum, the launch of Ethereum 2.0 and the transition from a proof of work (PoW) to a proof of stake (PoS) consensus model for blockchain is expected to lead to the consumption of 99.0% less energy. PoS requires less hardware than PoW, and the amount of energy needed to support safe transactions will decrease.

Application Insights
The green building segment led the market in 2022 and accounted for a 24.0% share of the global revenue. Green building, also known as sustainable building, is designing and implementing processes and structures that are environmentally resource-efficient and responsible throughout the life cycle, from site selection to design, maintenance, construction, operation, renovation, and deconstruction. It incorporates characteristics of economy, durability, usability, and comfort into the traditional building design. Energy and water efficiency, as well as resource efficiency, are key factors considered while designing a green building.

Global green technology & sustainability Market share and size, 2022
To learn more about this report, request a free sample copy

For instance, Zoomlion Heavy Industry Science & Technology Co., Ltd., a high-end equipment manufacturing firm, promoted Earth Day 2022 with specific steps for the construction machinery industry's green development. Zoomlion is leading the way in developing eco-friendly, energy-efficient products and building sustainable manufacturing in response to requests for bold, inventive, and widespread measures. Zoomlion's new energy aerial work platform (AWP) offers significant benefits in carbon emissions reduction, environmental conservation, and increased operational capabilities and accounted for 60% of AWP sales in 2021, with a prominent presence in 18 high-end markets. They were marketed in 58 countries and regions.

Regional Insights
North America accounted for the largest revenue share of above 39.0% in 2022 and is expected to pose new growth opportunities over the forecast period. It can be attributed to the rising number of investments and initiatives in the green environment. For instance, in June 2023, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), under the leadership of the Biden-Harris Administration, announced an investment of around USD 30 million to accelerate the sustainability of federal buildings and clean energy technologies.

green technology & sustainability Market Trends, by Region, 2023 - 2030
To learn more about this report, request a free sample copy

In another instance, the North American Climate, Energy, and Environment Partnership has encouraged governments to adopt more sustainable policies and to purchase more renewable energy and electric vehicles as needed. Additionally, in partnership with the International Renewable Energy Agency, as part of a long-term global initiative, Mexico, Canada, and the U.S. are launching a Trilateral North American initiative to assist isolated, remote, and indigenous communities in transitioning to clean, renewable, and reliable energy sources.

Vendors are concentrating their efforts on R&D and the integration of innovative technologies to address the challenges of climate change and rising pollution, emissions, and waste. The APAC region is predicted to be an attractive investment market, advancing at a significant CAGR during the forecast period. This expansion is due to the rapid growth in countries such as India and China, with India focusing on integrating new technologies to improve business operations. For instance, India hosted the Huawei APAC Digital Power Green Energy Summit 2022. In addition to discussing green development trends, the forum offered a stage where industry experts, policymakers, and sustainability practitioners explored opportunities to accelerate the energy transition.

Key Companies & Market Share Insights
To obtain a competitive advantage, major companies in the green technology and sustainability market concentrate on developments, innovations, and acquisitions. For instance, in August 2023, Hitachi Energy Ltd. announced an agreement with Google Cloud. The agreement is aimed at collaborating and co-creating numerous cloud software services and products in order to support the global energy transition. The initial offering resulting from this collaboration is Hitachi Energy's new API-based application, Velocity Suite Power Prices, which will allow worldwide customers convenient access to energy market intelligence of the North American market.

In another instance, in June 2022, Accenture and Microsoft announced that their joint venture Avanade would be addressing climate change challenges for both organizations and people. The initiative aims to help organizations convert their products, operations, and services to help accelerate the net zero transition. Companies constantly invest resources in researching and developing new technology and features.

In May 2022, Bio Town Ag and lenders partnered with Green Rock Energy Partners LLC, and acquired a share in Bio Town Biogas LLC, a renewable energy producer venturing into sustainable natural gas. The company aims to upgrade one of the largest and most cost-effective renewable natural gas and energy projects worldwide in Indiana. As part of the circular economy, Green Rock invests in, builds, buys, and operates environmentally sound & commercially successful enterprises and infrastructure through equity capital. Some of the eminent players operating in the global green technology & sustainability market include:

Foreword
Welcome to the 2018 updated and expanded e-version of The Sustainable
Business (2nd Edition).
Since the first manifestation of this book was published in 2008, the 
sustainability landscape has changed substantially. Indeed, back when the
European Foundation for Management Development (EFMD) first began 
distributing this book, ‘sustainability’ was not considered an acceptable topic
in the halls of business academia. Those of us at EFMD, however, firmly 
believed that sustainability and circular economics not only made business
sense, they were also necessary and practical, and the far-reaching areas
they cover include the legal, financial, economic, industrial, social and
behavioural aspects of business (not just ‘green’issues); so we pressed on.
Ten years later, EFMD and its global base of member institutions 
(business schools, corporations, government and public sector bodies), still
maintain that ‘sustainability’ is best defined as the capacity to continue into 
the long term and that one of the greatest strengths in its pursuit is the ability 
to measure and control costs wherever they arise in a business through the
careful use of scarce raw materials and resources. 
But there is still much work to do as unscrupulous and poorly trained 
people, non-profit institutions and NGO’s jump on the bandwagon with few 
clear goals in mind. The sad result is that ‘sustainability’ is now accused of
having lost its meaning – something that is all-too-often seen in deceitful PR 
and marketing campaigns, poorly designed academic courses, and 
questionable organizations that do little more than collect membership fees.
We may like to think that we live in a world of relative abundance. But our
world is fragile and currently under much pressure. Economic recession, a burgeoning global population and seismic shifts asthe economic and political axis
movesfromone part of the world to another all add to that pressure.
AsI wrote in the introduction to the first edition of The Sustainable Business,
we owe it to our children and our children’s children not to spend their inheritance on ourselves.
We can do that by adopting sustainable measures that generate long-term 
wealth and well-being, eliminate waste, preserve our environment and
create jobs. This book is one of the most comprehensive and thoughtful guides
as to how we can begin to do just that.
Prof. Eric Cornuel
Director General & CEO, EFMD
EDUCATIONAL VIDEOS!
To supplement this book, CIPS and EFMD have created a series of 
educational videos that introduce sustainability in a business context.
These videos can be freely accessed on demand. Simply enter the 
title of the video (below) into the YouTube website search window 
along with the words: CIPS and EFMD educational video.
Applying 
Sustainability in 
Business: 
Two Major Rules
Author’s Note
Buyer Beware
(or, All Aboard the Sustainability Bandwagon)
In the autumn of 2011, a former student of mine who had successfully completed my introductory sustainability program, packed his bags, hopped on
a plane, and flew a considerable distance to attend a newly launched
university course that claimed to focus on ‘shareholder wealth and corporate
sustainability’. But his heart quickly sank when he discovered that the ‘new’
course on sustainability he had paid for was really an old course on
corporate social responsibility. ‘I wanted to learn more about resource-life
extension and its application,’ he (angrily) told me later, ‘I didn’t travel
halfway across the world to sit through yet another CSR philosophy 
discussion.’
Around the same time, another
student of mine, again lured by the
promise of a ‘new’ sustainability program at an institute in another country,
signed up and set off to build a portfolio
in what she hopes will be a career that
involves managing sustainable business operations. But a few weeks after
‘Sustainable development is like 
teenage romance – everybody
claims they’re doing it, but most
people aren’t, and those that are,
are doing it very badly.’
Dr. Chris Spray,
Northumbrian Water Group
the semester began, it became clear that the ‘new’ sustainability program she
had set her sights on was little more than an old psychology-based curriculum
into which the word ‘sustainability’ had been inserted. ‘The emphasis of one
class was something about emotions and ethics with no attempt to link them 
to sustainability or circularity,’ she told me afterward – with more than a hint
of disgust in her voice.
xii The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
Several years ago, an announcement was made by a recognized business 
school proclaiming that an ‘International Sustainability Conference’ would
be held on its campus. A brief background check of the people involved,
however, revealed that none of the nine academics that comprised the
organizing and program committees had ever conducted research in the field
of sustainability, nor had any of them published a paper on the subject.
Further investigation revealed that none of them had ever worked with a
business or other organization in any sustainability-oriented capacity.
And so it goes as an increasing number of business schools and their opportunistic staff rush to capitalize on a subject that many of them rather aggressively
turned their backs on for decades. ‘For years we couldn’t interest a single business school to even consider sustainability or circular economics as viable
academic subjects,’ said a director at a prestigious business school accreditation
body,’but somehow nowthey’re suddenly all experts.’ Similarly, an EU official 
recently informed one of my colleagues that sustainability is no longer a valid 
business topic because it has been replaced by the more advanced concept of 
‘circular economics’. My colleague, who has over 30 years of experience in the 
field, tried to explain that although the two topics may have slightly different 
meanings, they are synergistic, compliment one another, and require separate 
understanding in order for application to take place. ‘No, that’s not true,’ the 
official confidently replied.
Meanwhile, at the other end of the spectrum, yet another former student of 
mine complained that she was drowning in advanced chemistry and physics
(i.e.: the material sciences) at a reputable university sustainability program that is
renowned for teaching the fundamentals of resource-life extension (see 
chapters 5, 6 and 22)..
So who or what is to blame for this? Is it the growing number of higherlearning institutes that are eager to cash in on a subject that their solipsistic
academics have finally realized is as important as it is popular? Or should we
blame naïve business students (and businesses) that leap before they look?
In the rush to jump aboard the sustainability bandwagon, the result is
much unnecessary confusion in the form of ‘new money made from old rope’ (i.e.: 
small amounts of sustainability/circular material combined with old and 
outdated curricula), while integral subjects such as chemistry, physics, 
architecture, environmental topics, and so on, are left out of the loop.
This book was written, in part, to help clear the confusion and I hope it
does so without resorting to the ‘three common habits of the most irritating
management gurus’. According to The Economist, these habits are: (1) presenting old ideas as new breakthroughs,(2) over-relying on ‘modelfirms’that we are
told we should all emulate, and (3) flogging management tools off the back of
too many numbered lists and bullet-pointed principles.
My fact-checker and sounding-board is, once again, Walter Stahel, who has
over 40 years of experience in the field and is one of sustainability’s true pioneers.We, and our partners at EFMD, hope you find this publication useful.
Introduction:
What is Sustainability?
It is a sad fact that much of the world is
dominated by short-term thinking. And
an in-depth look at the numerous problems that humanity now faces often
reveals that the downside of allowing
individuals or groups to do whatever
they want (without considering future
consequences) usually results in all of
In the 1980s, the Brundtland
Commission, a UN investigative body, defined sustainability
as development that meets the 
needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own
needs.
us paying dearly for it. Equally as true is that an increasing number of people and their governments are waking up to the fact that producing high levels
of costly waste and pollutants does not equate with freedom, nor is it a basic
human right. Indeed, it seems fairly safe to assume that the era of privatized
profits boosted by socialized costs will, at some point, have to draw to a
close. Hence the growing interest in sustainability and the circular economy,
catch-all conceptsthat can be as difficult to comprehend as they are to define.
So first, what exactly is sustainability and why is the word ‘green’ attached
to it – particularly when most definitions of the verb sustain don’t mention
the word ‘green’? (for a working definition of ‘circular economy’, see page 6)
To be sure, most definitions of sustain describe: processes or acts of longterm continuance; causing or allowing something to continue over a period of
time; a process or action that keeps something up or keeps something going. It
is therefore easy to conclude that, in a business context, sustainability
involvesthe processes and actions that keep a firm solvent over time.
Following this logic it is also easy to assume that an unsustainable process
or act is destined come to an end sooner rather than later. In business terms,
this obviously translates into financial loss, even if the business makes a bit of
2 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
money in the short term. So why, you might still ask, isthe word sustainability
synonymous for ‘going green’?
The answer is that countless awareness campaigns created by far-sighted
environmentalists have gone a long way toward educating the public about
the consequences of short-term thinking. And when one group successfully
dominates the discourse of a multifaceted issue it is their tune that is most
often heard.
Broadly speaking, however, the capacity for continuance into the long-term
(sustainability) is about more than the environment. Make no mistake, the environment should be of paramount concern to all of us for the simple reason that
every business (and life) resource comes from it. That being said, focusing only
on the environmental aspects of sustainability – particularly in a business context – is both short-sighted and partial. It’slike claiming that good health issolely
about vegetables. It is therefore important to note that business sustainability
also embracesthe legal, financial, economic, industrial,social, material (science)
and behavioural arenas. 
To add to the confusion, each of these arenas (or fields of study) propagates
its own language, customs and culture, which don’t often mix in business circles
and/or the halls of academia (see FIGURE A-1). Fortunately, however, there is
common ground: waste elimination and resource-life extension. This is so
important that it’s worth repeating: the mechanism of sustainability is waste
elimination (and prevention) followed by resource-life extension. From a
business viewpoint, sustainability is therefore about reducing expenses –
including future expenses – in every conceivable form so as to facilitate
profitability, competitiveness and longevity. These expenses consist of the
costs of short-term thinking, the problems and costs associated with waste, the
spiralling cost of raw materials and resource deficits (resulting from an
increasingly affluent and growing population all of whom are competing for the
world’s finite supply of resources), costs created or exacerbated by poorly 
designed products and production processes, the costs of climate change (e.g.
property damage and crop failure), and the costs of unemployment and
underemployment – to name just a few (in 1994, British business consultant
John Elkington condensed these areas into three categories and referred to
them as the ‘triple bottom line’: the financial, environmental and human
aspects of business).
In other words, to understand sustainability (or the circular economy) it
is essential to begin by first comprehending the big picture – i.e. to
acknowledge that these terms embrace well-being and longevity and to
develop an awareness of what that encompasses before analytic thought
does its necessary reductive work. Rather than building up from particulars
to generals (the empiricist method), one must begin with generals – an inplace, intuitive wisdom of the logic behind thinking in the long term, what it
entails, and why it’s important. Once that is obtained, most people
instinctively gain a better idea as to where to direct their analytic
Introduction: What is Sustainability? 3
attention. Again, it’s difficult to expect progress by focusing only on one area
(e.g. the environmentalism aspects of sustainability). The problem with this
(the empirical) approach is that once a few facts become clear it’s tempting to
believe that they possess an independence all their own and to rest in them and
believe that they are the foundation of what is being sought (theologians call
this‘idolatry’).1 Obviously, dividing the world into partsissomething we all do
to ease understanding, but in doing so something is always devalued – and
what is diminished is often an awareness of and contact with that which can
only function as a whole.2
This book is an introductory guide. It explains the fundamentals of
sustainability and the circular economy (waste elimination and resource
extension) from a business application angle. To aid comprehension, an easyto-understand format is used that consists of seven categories that each begin
with the letter P. To be sure, alliterations are rarely perfect, and reducing any
broad-ranging topic into categories usually ends up neglecting something that
others see as valuable; however, the 7-P model (see FIGURE A-2) has proven
to be helpful both in and out of the classroom so it is used here as a
framework. A brief explanation of the 7-Psisasfollows:
Preparation – accepting the breadth and depth of sustainability and 
circular economics (particularly the financial implications) and
understanding that these concepts are not solely about the environment or
being independent. Equally as important is a full recognition of what the
reformer is up against when trying to implement profitable, long-term
practices (e.g. apathy, ignorance, short-term thinking, and what Machiavelli
FIGURE A-1: Sustainability andcircularity arecomprised of numerous subjects and fields
4 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
called ‘the incredulity of mankind, who do not believe in anything new until
they have had actual experience of it.’).
Preservation – encompasses two areas: internal (collecting and displaying
real-time measurement) and external (keeping ahead of laws, pending legislation, trends and developments).
Processes – sustainable belief systems, tools, communication pathways, 
philosophies, business models, and thought patterns that help match a
business with customer demands, core capabilities and best practices.
People – accepting the importance of training and education and working
diligently to avoid the wasting of people, specifically: employees (who seek
security and motivation), stakeholders (who want a return on their investment), customers (who want safe, value-laden products), and the world community – including the two-thirds of humanity who are currently left out of the
global economic loop (who desire jobs and inclusion) and who represent an
economic force all their own.
Place – the buildings and places where work is performed and/or products
are sold.
Product – goods and services that are free from unnecessary waste (‘nonproduct’) and toxins – and designed so that the materials, energy and manpower that comprise them (and their packaging) are treated as investments
and continuously reused.
Production – the physical, mechanical, biological, and chemical processes
used to transform raw materials into products or services – as well as the transportation of raw materials and finished goods.
To be sure, there is so much overlap amongst the different fields and categories that comprise sustainability that it can often be quite difficult to determine
where one category or field begins and another ends. Again, my advice is to
focus on the big picture rather than any perceived boundaries.
In summation, enabling sustainability and the circle economy to function 
within a business requires: (1) designing out waste in all its forms, (2) 
keeping products (i.e.: materials and molecules) in constant use, and, (3) the 
renewal, restoration, regeneration, and conservation of the natural 
environment from which all business resources are derived (environmentalism). 
Please note, however, that this book does not discuss the environment in any 
detail; the following 200-pages focus on introductory sustainable business 
application and simply do not allow it. Numerous books and studies written by 
people that are well qualified in environmentalism (and related fields of study)
do an excellent job of explaining the paramount importance of the natural 
environment and its pivotal relationship with business. We encourage you to 
supplement the information herein with their contributions. 
Introduction: What is Sustainability? 5
FIGURE A-2: The 7-P Application Model (toward sustainability) leading toward 
resource-life extension and the facilitation of:
x genuine long-term wealth and financial well-being, 
x job creation and security,
x the elimination of waste and pollutants, and,
x reductions in resource consumption.
© 2008 Jonathan T. Scott
Strategy
Preparation
Processes
Preservation
Tactics
Place
Product
Production
Waste
Elimination and
Prevention
Time, money 
and labour
Other 
investments
The environment
6 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
The Circular Economy and Sustainability:
Understanding the Terminology
 In 1859, Charles Darwin published a book titled On 
the Origin of Species. In his book, Darwin put forth a 
theory that all living organisms compete for resources 
and that those organisms that develop an innate 
advantage, and pass this advantage on to their offspring, 
tend to prosper the most. This, he said, is how species 
continuously survive and improve.
 So far so good, but here’s something you probably 
didn’t know. In his book, Darwin did not introduce the 
concept of evolution. The idea that successful 
organisms continuously evolve over periods of time had been around for decades 
and was generally accepted by most naturalists (biologists). Darwin’s contribution
was to provide the rule or mechanism that explained how the concept of evolution 
worked. Five years later, another biologist, summarized Darwin’s theory using the 
words ‘survival of the fittest’, a phrase that Darwin reportedly admired.
 In summation: evolution is the concept. The ability to adapt to change and 
genetically pass the adaptation to others is the mechanism. In other words, the 
mechanism enables the concept to work. Likewise, think of sustainability and the 
circular economy. Sustainability is a concept that provides reason and purpose. Its 
definition (the capacity to continue into the long-term) explains why pursuing it is 
important in business. But be warned: although long-term continuance may seem 
like a worthy and logical business goal, in a world dominated by people that seek to 
grab as much as they can as quickly as they can, it is not an easy sell. 
The term ‘circular economy’ is the what aspect of the puzzle. ‘Circularity’ is
basically a waste prevention concept that is well explained by the statement that ‘it’s 
far more economical to sell one kilo of a substance ten times than it is to sell ten 
kilos of the same substance only once’. Circular is used to describe a zero-waste
economy that profits from the continuous use of two types of material inputs: 
(1) biological materials are those that can be reintroduced back into the biosphere in 
a restorative manner without harm or waste (i.e: they breakdown naturally), and, 
(2) technical materials, which can be continuously re-used without harm or waste.
The mechanism (or the ‘how’) that enables both sustainability and the circular 
economy to work, which is what this book is about, can accurately be described in a 
business context as waste elimination (achieving 100% of purchases and 
investments) leading to resource-life extension (waste prevention).
 
 
PREPARATION
...the act of making ready (i.e. putting or setting in order in advance
of an act or purpose). Before beginning the sustainability process it’s
important to: (1) learn what sustainability entails, (2) articulate why
the pursuit of it is important, and (3) establish the groundwork that will
instil both managers and non-management employees with enthusiasm, answers and support. Without this foundation, most attempts at
sustainability are prone to confusion, suspicion, disorganization and
dwindling motivation – as well as wasted time and efforts.
1
Fundamentals
Twenty years ago, the DuPont corporation decided to transition from a progressive focus on internal safety and environmental regulations at the company’s various factories, to a more holistic approach that could be fully integrated
into the business models of its numerous branches and subsidiaries. The result
produced a reduction in absolute energy use by 6%, increased production by
40%, and saved the firm over $6 billion. In 2011 alone, a three-year effort from
the company’s Building Innovations business (which provides products and
services for residential and commercial construction) not only achieved a goal
of zero waste to landfill, it also created revenues of $2.2 billion from the sale
of waste products at a cost savings of $400,000. Further sustainability-based
activities at other subsidiaries generated over $1.6 billion in revenue; particularly from products that help customers (or the final consumer) reduce their
energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. ‘Sustainability consistently delivers both top-line and bottom-line growth for DuPont,’says Dawn Rittenhouse,
business director for sustainability at the company. She further added (in an
interview for this publication) that ‘Sustainability makes it possible to create
value for business,society and shareholders as well.’
Despite DuPont’s successes, however, sustainability is still not an easy sell in
the business world. For example, when General Electric made the decision in
2004 to have its business operations become more sustainable, many company
managers were not impressed (many thought it was just environmental gobbledygook). Four years afterwards, however, the decision delivered $100 million
in cost savings to the company’s bottom line while yielding a portfolio of 80 new
products and services that generated $17 billion in annual revenues (greenhouse gas emissions were reduced by 30%). ‘[Sustainability is] 10 times better
than I ever imagined,’ says the company’s CEO Jeffery Immelt.1
1 Fundamentals 9
For the most part, what Rittenhouse and Immelt are talking about is eliminating and preventing waste (a.k.a. non-product) in all its forms while extending the life-cycle of the business’s resources – both of which resulted in each
company becoming more innovative in the process (GE’s commitment remains
very much in line with the firm’sSix Sigma mantra from the 1980s).
Taken as a first step toward sustainability, waste elimination (and prevention)
may not seem very glamorous; however, it has proven, time and again, to not only
increase quality, facilitate innovation, and lower resource and disposal costs, but
also reduce pollutants and the expense of pollution in the bargain (which is why
environmentalists are so enamoured with the subject). Electricity consumption
provides a good example. The American EPA estimates that a typical data centre
consumes 10 to 100 times more energy per square metre than the average office
building. Yet a 2,300 m2 data centre spending $2.6 million annually for power can
still enjoy electricity savings of more than 20% per year simply by reducing its
energy demands (approximately $1.2 million over a four-year period).2 A recent
IBM study dug even deeper, concluding that less than 4% of the energy going
into a modern server farm actually processes data; 40% is needed to cool the
room where the servers are located, another 40% is used to cool the interior of
the machines, and over 16% is used to keep the servers idling in case a sudden
increase in processing occurs.
3 This means that 96% of the costs of operating a
server area are used to perform activities that are unrelated to data processing.
Moreover, the extra electricity needed results in more coal being burned (coal is
the most common fuel used to produce electricity), which produces more pollution, which results in health and clean-up costs being added to the mix, and so
on. The problem is exacerbated when one takes into account that up to and over
50% of the overall energy a business consumes is usually wasted.
And the more a business wastes, the more it has to purchase.
For a growing business, an energy-intensive business, or a business suffering
through the difficulties of a recession, waste creation is clearly not a sustainable path. The good news is that many of the business costs associated with
waste can be reduced with long-term sustainable solutions that are so simple
they defy belief. For example, Yahoo saves 60% of its electricity costs by opening the doors and windows where its servers are located and letting the hot air
out. Intel states that similar efficient air-cooling can cut the power costs of a 10
megawatt data centre by $3 million thereby eliminating hundreds of thousands
of tons of greenhouse gases and their costly damage.
4
10 reasons for a business to become sustainable
Following is a look at several market force trends that are currently impacting
businesses either directly or indirectly through suppliers and supply streams
and are redefining how businesses compete.
10 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
1. Volatile energy prices
In 2004, the price of a barrel of oil was below $20. Between November 2010
and April 2011, oil prices rose from $82 to over $112 a barrel. Then they rose
again. In 2015, prices dropped to $50 a barrel. How can a business nail 
together a budget with such price fluctuations? Meanwhile, increases in 
population, longevity, and affluence continue to put pressure on demand.
Insulated windows and walls, and efficient machines and equipment are
obvious ways to fight higher fuel costs, but changes in behavior are what is 
really needed to start the ball rolling Firms like UPS teach drivers to reduce
left-hand turns, pack trucks tighter with more packages, and drive fuelefficient trucks more efficiently. As a result the company saves millions of
dollars every year in petrol and maintenance costs.
5 Investing in more
sustainable energy sources (e.g. wind, solar and hydrogen) goes even further
in helping businesses avoid the rising costs of non-renewable energy sources.
For example, the Sierra Nevada Brewing Company in Chico, California,
purchased solar panels that produce 203 kilowatts of electricity in addition to
four 250 kilowatt fuel cells.6 Thanks to rebates, tax credits and other
financial incentives, a 100% return-on-investment was gained within seven
years – after which time the company began enjoying incredibly low energy
costs. Switching shipments and deliveries from trucks to trains is another
move that slashed the business’s dependence on oil and saves around $2
million a year7 – money that is used to fund additional cost-saving projects.
2. Increases in resource and raw material costs
As human populations increase, raw material prices also increase (currently, 20% of the world’s population uses 80% of the planet’s resources).
Increases in consumption, combined with a concept called ‘failure to diversify’ (relying on only 
one particular strain or breed of a crop or livestock, which makes them an easier target for viruses, 
fungi and other pathogens) are causing scientists to predict that bananas and cocoa may virtually 
disappear in the coming years like the potato did in Ireland during the potato blight of 1845. 
Meanwhile, the enormous amount of goods that consumers throw away daily,
which still contain all the materials, labour and energy that went into
making them (in the USA, for example, 2.5 million plastic bottles are
discarded every hour8
) are setting the stage for similar shortages and price 
increases. A profitable solution for non-living materials is ‘extended product
life’ or resource-life extension, which turns waste into assets via reuse,
remanufacturing and recycling. For example, Stewart’sIce Cream Shops in the
USA has been using refillable bottles(over 12-million annually) in its over 200
shops for more than four decades thereby saving millions of dollars a year.
9
Elsewhere, Caterpillar, the world’s largest manufacturer of construction 
equipment, delivered years of record profits due to a manufacturing
business model that makes high-quality components, collects them after 
they’ve been used, cleans them up, and reincorporates them into new
1 Fundamentals 11
products at a cost 30%–60% less than making them from scratch.10 Many of
these parts are made once and sold three times (think of the profit margins
involved). Meanwhile Interface Inc., the world’s largest manufacturer of
commercial carpets has, for 14 years, been using old carpets to make new
carpets instead ofsourcing petroleum as a raw material.
As a result, profits doubled, employment almost doubled, and the company’s
stock price increased 550% over a five-year period.11
3. Increases in waste and disposal costs
Simply put, there aren’t enough landfill sites to dump the world’s increasing
amounts of garbage (approximately 2 kilos per person per day and rising12) so
prices rise accordingly. In the USA, between 1985 and 1995 the average cost
of disposing one ton of garbage into landfill rose 425%.13 The bottom line is
that throwing stuff away costs money – and the bigger the business, the greater
the costs. The Sierra Nevada Brewing Company (mentioned above) saved $1
million in landfill fees and $2 million in waste haulage fees by finding ways to
reuse or recycle what it used to throw away.14 Meanwhile, Wal-Mart issued an
edict to its distributors demanding that they reduce their packaging by 5%. As a
result, the retail giant is now saving $3.4 billion a year in waste disposal costs.
15
Another example is 3M. After sifting through its waste bins to discover what
was being thrown away, the 3M company developed a profitable new product
made entirely fromwaste.
16Nowthat’ssustainability!
4. Changes in waste legislation
In 2018, China gave a large part of the world a headache when it (rightly) 
refused to accept garbage from other countries and banned the import of 
plastic waste. This was a particular blow to the UK, which has relied on using 
China as waste dump for years (as much as 55% of its waste paper and 25% 
of waste plastics per annum). Tighter regulations of fertilizers in the 
European Economic Area also came into effect in 2018 as well as strict new 
emissions and energy efficiency rules for all gas and wood-burning stoves (it 
seems that banning wasteful incandescent light bulbs many years 
ago to help lower national energy demands and reduce CO2 emissions
was merely the beginning). Around the globe, paper, plastic and other
recyclable materials are increasingly being turned away from landfill sites to
avoid waste and encourage recycling. Similar waste legislation examples
include the USA’s Toxics Release Inventory, which some claim was America’s first intelligent step toward waste legislation, take-back laws that make
manufacturers legally responsible for their products after they’ve been sold
to encourage reuse and remanufacturing technologies – and directives such
asWEEE (WasteElectric and Electronic Equipment), which took effect in 2005
(designed to mitigate the incineration and dumping of electronic waste) and
RoHS(theRestriction of Hazardous Substances), a 2006 lawthat bans electronic
equipment containing certain levels of cadmium, lead, mercury and other toxic
12 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
substances. Further regulations include the 2007 EUP directive (Energy Using
Products), which requires producers to design and track products according
to closed-loop waste reduction practices, and the REACH authorization (the
directive on Registration, Evaluation, and Authorization of Chemicals), which
requires manufacturers to publicly display toxicity data and to prove that the
chemicals used to make products are safe.17 Additionally,the 2008/98/EU directive, which went into effect in December of 2009, categorizes waste prevention
as a first priority, resource reuse as a second priority, and makes material
recovery, in almost all its forms, mandatory. Rest assured that more such
legislation, all of which is designed to mitigate future waste problems and
expenses, is on theway.
5. Increases in environmental laws
Digging up the earth and turning it into pollution is not a sustainable business
model; it’s a sign of costly waste. Legislation that classifies CO2 as a pollutant
merely adds weight to this argument (think ‘cap and trade’). Company administrators sometimes claim ignorance, but astute shareholders know what is at
stake.In 2008, for example, the Securities and Exchange Commission was petitioned by representatives of seven American statesto force companies to reveal
the actions they’re taking to deal with climate change. This was not due to a
sudden interest in the environment, but rather a belief that investors should
have the opportunity to ‘avoid investing in companies that are ignoring the
spiralling costs of a changing environment’.
18 A year earlier, the CEOs of several
corporations had called on the American president to enact mandatory reductions in carbon emissions. The group consisted of chief executives from Alcoa,
BP America,Caterpillar, Duke Energy, DuPont, the FPL Group, General Electric,
PG&E, PNM Resources and others. ‘We felt it was better to be in the formative
stages of legislation,’ said Jim Owens, who wasthen the CEO and Chairman of
Caterpillar, ‘[otherwise we] could cost [ourselves] out of the market.’ By banding together to avoid a patchwork of costly and conflicting regional regulations,
far-sighted CEOs are trying to work with lawmakers to set goals and targets
that allow businesses time to make changes and implement solutions that
will improve the environment and energy efficiency, protect the economy and
national trade, and deliver a one–two punch to waste-filled competitors and
products.
19
6. Changes in customer demands and expectations
‘Don’t go into business to sell what you want to sell,’ I regularly tell my students, ‘go into business to sell what customers want to buy – and that includes
where they want it, how they want it, when they want it, and why they want it.’
And the Repair Association ( www.repair.org ) has taken this notion to heart by 
stating that when manufacturers own the only repair shop around, prices go up 
and quality goes down. Repair.org works to band together consumers for the 
purpose of fighting corporations that initiate unfair practices such as the 
1 Fundamentals 13
locking of mobile phones and denying product replacement parts . Further 
back, in 2007, a major telecom manufacturer stated that it had received 50
request for proposal bids (out of 400) asking for information on the
company’s sus- tainability initiatives. In 2008, the number increased to 125,
and in 2009 it was over 200.20 It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to deduce that
B2B customers and B2C customers want lower costs, fewer toxins, less guilt,
more incentives, and less packaging associated with the products they buy.
Even retailers are watch- ing over their supply chains (where most of their
environmental footprint is located) in order to reduce unnecessary
expenses that result from wasteful practices. Energy and material price
rises are bad enough, but when they’re added to supply chains they create
even more costs. Firms such as Planet Met- rics collect information on raw
material sourcing, production methods, deliv- ery systems and energy use –
indeed all aspects of a product’s life-cycle – to provide a clearer picture of
what might happen if oil prices increase, or water becomes scarce, or a law
changes, or a higher price is placed on CO2, and so
forth.21 In other words, it’s possible for major buyers to now know ahead of
time which products they purchase are more likely to experience cost increases
(or get hit by new legislation) – as well as the names of alternative (lower-cost)
suppliers. If that’s not enough to scare the hell out of a wasteful business, I don’t
know what is.
7. Competitive advantage
Duringthe2001–2003recession, global carpet giantInterface faceda 36%worldwide slump in carpet sales. Nevertheless the company gained market share during this period because of its commitment to low-cost sustainable operations.
22
More recently, the Tennant floor maintenance company introduced a commercial floor cleaner that electrically charges tap water to behave like a heavy-duty
cleaner.
23 The safe, toxin-free result cleans floors better than anything else on
the market, thereby enabling customers to forego the expenses of purchasing
cleaning solvents and the cost and time of training employees how to use them.
In addition, valuable storage space that once held toxic cleanersis now a thing of
the past for Tennant’s customers.That’s bad newsfor cleaning supply companies
that choose to merely make their chemicals more environmentally friendly. The
message couldn’t be clearer. Going green isn’t enough – and companies that sit
on the sustainability sideline may discover that when they finally decide to take
action their competitors have already passed them by.
8. Transparency issues
In 2017, Unilever successfully fought off a hostile takeover bid led by Kraft 
Heinz and Brazil’s 3G Capital, the latter company being described as having 
‘elevated serial deal-making and ferocious cost-cutting to a fine art’ 
(Financial Times, 3, Dec 2017). Unilever’s CEO Paul Polman described the
14 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
bid as a clash between a long-term sustainable business model for multiple 
stakeholders and a short-term model that is entirely focused on shareholder 
primacy. Polman went on to explain that the takeover attempt (which was an 
unusual defeat for 3G), failed because Unilever has a supportive board of 
directors that understands the company’s long-term business model, so 3G’s
hostile offer was dismissed by the board as being too low and making no 
strategic sense. Such is the way the world is now turning as an increasing 
number of executives shun short-term gain for longer-term profit. Likewise, 
businesses are more likely it is to be shunned by customers that they perceive 
as short-term business practices. The result is that companies like
outdoor clothing manufacturer Patagonia use proof of long-term 
strategic intention (transparency) to their advantage by making it easy for
customers to follow products online from conception to the sourcing of
materials to manufacture and delivery.24 Clorox and SC Johnson take a
similar route by posting online lists of every ingredient in their products.
Business writer and environmental speaker Andrew Winston says it best:
transparency comes in two flavours: voluntary (information donated by the
company) or involuntary (information donated by a consumer watchdog
group or disgruntled customers).25 Guess which one is bestfor your business?
9. The acquisition, retention and motivation
of astute employees
To be sure, money is important to employees, but there are other things that
some employeesthink about as well. Forthese folks, the ability to make a difference, feel a sense of accomplishment, work with pride and purpose and other
intrinsic motivators can be infinitely more powerful than money. Ray Anderson, founder and former CEO of Interface carpets,said that nothing galvanizes
his employees more than the company’s commitment to sustainability.
26 ‘In
the competition for the best business school graduates and other high-flyers,
especially once the economy starts to recover, companies that show they were
not mere fair-weather friends of sustainability will be at an advantage,’ wrote
the Economist magazine. As if to prove the point, sustainability pioneer Patagonia receives, on average, more than 1,000 CVs for every job position available. Think about how that minimizes talent search and recruitment costs.
10. The cost of procrastination
The longer a business takes to act the higher the cost of change and the
further behind it can fall in terms of profitability, innovation and market
share. Delayed action also ensures that additional costs – many of which are
hidden – continue to accrue. For example, according to the American Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), building-related productivity losses and
illnesses resulting from poor lighting, poor ventilation and/or indoor pollution (a.k.a. ‘sick building syndrome’), cost American businesses $60 billion.27
1 Fundamentals 15
And that’s just from indoor pollution. Outdoor pollution creates costs as well.
For example, the EPA estimates that it will take $1 trillion to clean up America’s trichloroethylene residues (trichloroethylene is a toxic substance used to
remove grease from metal) and that $100 billion isspent in the USA on medical
expenses related to polluted air alone. Meanwhile, a 2001 survey of nearly 600
children found that perfluorooctanoic acid – a substance found in food wrap,
Teflon and stain-resistantfabric coatings – isswirling in the blood of 96% ofthe
children it sampled28 (one of dozens of toxins now found as a matter of course
in human bodies29). Traces of arsenic, mercury and benzene also show up
regularly in the human body alongside heavy metals such as lead, cadmium,
zinc, chromium and copper. In river sediments and estuaries these substances
are ubiquitous. Escalating levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and pesticides (each of which can take hundreds of years to degrade) make matters worse30 – as do residues from billions
of doses of prescription drugs now found as a matter of course along shorelines
and in wetlands. Swallowed to combat cancer, pain, depression and other ailments, most medications do not harmlessly dissolve into patients and disappear. Instead, they exit the body, leak from sewage pipes, and work their way
into the environment.31 Researchers in Canada found a dozen different toxic
drugs in water samples taken from the St. Lawrence River in Quebec, while
across the border in the USA a vast array of pharmaceuticals (including antibiotics, anti-convulsants, mood stabilizers and sex hormones) were found
in the drinking water supplies of 41 million Americans.
32 Added to this is the
belief of many scientists that toxin build-up in air,soil and water is more costly
and damaging than climate change – which is one reason why environmental
crimes committed by negligent company directors can now result in fines of
over $1 million and jail time of up to ten years.
Additional costs that result from waste
Unemployment and underemployment (i.e. the wasting of people) provide further examples ofthe cost of waste. Expenses associated with laying off employees (or negative job growth in general) include loss of investment in human
capital and skills (particularly in individuals that have been unemployed for
a long time), social and economic deprivation (rises in crime, depression,
divorce, family break-ups, poor health,33 lower life expectancy, etc.), and a
reduction in regional and national economic growth potential (particularly
from the one–two punch of fewer tax revenues along with increased government spending designed to spur growth). When poverty is added to the mix
these problems only intensify.
Stuart Hart, author of Capitalism at the Crossroads34 and a pioneer in the
field of ‘Inclusive Commerce’, discovered through his research that most business strategies focus exclusively on the 800 million or so people that make
up the industrial world while effectively ignoring the 4–5 billion people that
16 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
comprise the bottom of the economic pyramid. Contrary to popular belief,
the world’s poorest countries have had zero or negative economic growth
since the early 1980s35 and the years between 1990 and 1999 mark the slowest
growing decade the world economy has seen in the past 40 years.36 Of particular concern are the approximately 1 billion people that live on $1 a day
or less, the 16,000 children that die daily from malnutrition, and the fact that
the number of people suffering from chronic malnutrition has almost doubled since 1970. Meanwhile, in the world’s poorest regions (areas like subSaharan Africa) $25,000 is spent every minute servicing the debt owed to rich
countries. Today, the World Bank estimates that the developing world spends
around $13 in debt repayment for every $1 it receives in grants.37 Clearly, this
is not a sustainable path.
Connecting the dots
We know what happens when the world and its businesses are run in an
unsustainable manner. The ten-year period between 2000 and 2010 has been
described as the ‘most dispiriting and disillusioning decade in the post WWII
era’.
38 The millennium began with a dotcom bust and a Wall Street crash, both
of which were overshadowed by major terrorist attacks. In the years that followed there were even more large-scale terrorist bombings. Then came the
worldwide financial meltdown of 2008 brought about by irresponsible deregulation and monetary policies. Large swathes of the globe are now beset with
high unemployment, huge amounts of debt, and growing unrest. An increase
in catastrophic storms, floods and droughts – and the increasing acidification
of the world’s oceans – merely adds to overall costs and malaise as well as a
profound feeling that humanity is moving in the wrong direction. Furthermore, potable water is now at such a critical low level that wars over this crucial commodity are predicted to break out within 10–20 years while the Earth’s
resources (of which there are finite supplies) continue to be captured, abused,
concentrated to industrial (toxic) levels, and discarded at an alarming rate.
Meanwhile, on the 24th of July 2004, the American senate abandoned plans
to establish a cap-and-trade policy for the United States. Ironically, the day
before this decision was made, Lew Hay (CEO of one of the country’s largest
utility owners) stated that setting a price on major pollutants and laying down
requirements for renewable energy could create the certainty to – among other
things – make big next-generation investments that would create ‘roughly
50,000 jobs over the next five years’. Around the same time, as if to capitalize on the inability of American politicians to think in the long term, China
reported that it was establishing a five-year plan based on placing a price on
costly pollutants as a means of shifting to a less expensive and more sustainable economy.
Even military strategists are jumping on board the sustainability bandwagon. Retired Brigadier General Steve Anderson (the senior US military
logistician during the Iraq war)stated,‘…over1,000Americans alone have
1 Fundamentals 17
been killed in Iraq and Afghanistan hauling fuel to air-conditioned tents and
buildings. If our military would simply insulate these structures, it would save
billions of dollars, and, more importantly, save the lives of truck drivers and
their escorts… [while taking] lots of big fuel trucks (i.e. Taliban targets) off the
road [thereby] expediting the end of the conflict.’39
‘We have seen the enemy,’ said Walt Kelly’s satirical character Pogo, ‘and he
is us.’
There is a better way. It is possible to abandon the costly, cancerous actions
that constitute short-term thinking. It is possible to do more with less, obtain
more from purchases and investments, reuse industrial inputs and outputs,
and minimize future problems and expenses. To be sure, sustainable business
practices will not solve all of the world’sills – the complex, multi-dimensional
configuration of sustainability ensures that there is no silver bullet that can
be relied upon to hit every target. Equally as true is that no known business
on Earth can call itself 100% sustainable (those that are interested are, for the
most part, merely experimenting with the concept). That being said, eliminating waste, thinking whole-system, and acting in the long term is a big step in
the right direction. Businesses in the manufacturing, retail, financial and service sectors are benefitting in astonishing ways. If you wish to take part in this
phenomenon, (to paraphrase Mahatma Gandhi) you will have to be the change
you want to see in your business. Translation: clean your own house first. Let
your competitors spend their money on lawyers and lobbyists. Rather than
make excuses and continue with delays,start thinking long-term.. 
FIGURE1-1:The areaswheresustainability leads
Adapted fromWalter Stahel’s ‘Quality Cube’
18 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
2
Understanding Waste
Imagine a businesstaking 30%, 40%, 60% or more of its hard-earned revenues,
placing this money on a pyre, and burning it. If that is too difficult to imagine,
try to picture a business flushing its revenues down a drain or throwing them
away as if they were garbage. As preposterous as these scenarios may seem,
businesses around the world perform the equivalent of them every day – and
because discarding money is not conducive to long-term business success, it is
here that the story of modern-day sustainability begins.
Back in the 1970s, the United States was wracked with a growing number of
costly problems that were often explained away as a necessary component of
conducting business. For example, in the state of New York, children living in
an area named Love Canal began developing rare forms of cancer and other
illnesses at a rate that far exceeded what was considered normal (the residents
eventually learned that their community had been built on top of a toxic waste
dump). In other cities across the country people were told to stay indoors
to avoid the harmful effects of increasing levels of smog. And in Ohio, the
Cuyahoga River, one of the state’s main waterways, caught on fire after becoming saturated with oil, chemicals and garbage.
Further south, in Chattanooga, Tennessee, a similar story had been unfolding for years.According to the WorldResourcesInstitute,Chattanooga was once
renowned for its natural beauty, but as a means of facilitating job growth and
economic prosperity the city decided to attract a variety of industries (including textile mills, chemical plants and coke foundries) into its confines without
first considering the short-term profit models that drove these businesses. As
long-term planning continued to be thrown to the wayside, the region slowly
morphed into a thriving industrial waste site. Soon the city’s riverfronts were
2 Understanding Waste 19
clustered with factories and its mountains were reduced to what looked like
stains behind thick clouds of industrial smoke.
By the late 1960s, companies were dumping toxic waste into the area’srivers
at an increasing pace and the air quality was, according to federal authorities,
the worst of any city in the United States. People driving cars had to turn their
lights on in the middle of the day and the mountain ridges often could not be
seen from the city below. Girls covered their heads with scarves so that soot
would not get in their hair on the way to school. Meanwhile, tuberculosis cases
grew to three times the national average and other problems began to emerge.
As times changed and industries refused to change, a significant number of
manufacturing jobs became obsolete – and in what became a familiar pattern
across numerous American industrial cities, unemployment grew, bringing
crime, social unrest and racial tensions, followed by flight to the suburbs and
the abandonment of downtown areas.
1
Faced with these and other mounting problems, as well asthe unprecedented
nationwide healthcare and pollution clean-up costs resulting from them, the
federal government introduced a series of laws that restricted the amount of
pollutants a business could dump while making companies responsible for
cleaning up the messes that they created. And, needless to say, the majority of
America’s business communities angrily reacted by claiming that these laws
would greatly damage the nation’s businesses as a whole, resulting in massive
employee lay-offs, huge rises in the cost of products and services, and a decline
in the economic prosperity and competitiveness of the country.
Imagine the surprise then when the 3M Corporation publicly stated that
it not only welcomed the new clean-up laws, but that it would voluntarily
go beyond them by setting higher standards. 3M administrators confidently
made this announcement because one of their managers, a Chinese immigrant named Joseph Ling, had successfully explained to them that the truckloads of garbage the company regularly sent to landfill sites, and the smoke
billowing from its factories, and the discharges flowing from its drainage pipes
were nothing more than signs of waste – and that waste isirrefutable proof that
a business is haemorrhaging money (today, waste is defined as not obtaining
100% from purchases and investments). Ling went on to rationalize that if 3M
made efforts to reduce its waste, substantial cost savings could be enjoyed in
terms of lower raw material expenses, fewer disposal expenses, and reduced
pollution clean-up costs.
Further shockwaves were created when the company declared that it would
rely on two pioneering methods to eliminate its waste. First, rather than collect
and treat waste afterit was created (asthe law stated), 3M declared that it would
prevent waste at its source before it became a problem. Second, the company
insisted that front-line employees would play an integral role in obtaining this
objective (the usual method at the time was to employ engineering specialists
and pollution control consultants).
20 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
Ling’s ground-breaking waste elimination program began simply enough by
asking employeesto stop being wasteful. Leaks,spills and other forms of material waste were reduced or eliminated; scrap material was recycled back into
production processes; products were reformulated using less toxic and more
sustainable substances; and equipment and manufacturing processes were
redesigned so that they required fewer raw materials and less energy to
produce.
Fifteen years and hundreds of improvements later, 3M discovered that its
efforts had lowered overall waste and emissions by 50% and had resulted in the
company saving over $500 million in costs. In fact, the program was deemed
to be such a success that the company launched an improved version of it in
1990 with the intent of reducing additional waste and emissions by a further
90% in ten years.
2 Dozens more efficiency projects were launched and millions
more dollars were saved before employees and managers figuratively stepped
back and wiped their brows, firmly believing that there were no cost-effective
projects left to pursue. Unbeknownst to them, however, an independent 3M
plant in Midland, Michigan, thought differently. Entrenched in the belief that
eliminating waste is a never-ending process, plant administrators set two new
objectives designed to push themselves and their employees further. The first
objective was to cut waste and emissions an additional 35%. The second was
to integrate local health and environmental experts into the program – a move
that introduced workers to different perspectives and provided them with new
ways of thinking. Working with the community in which the plant waslocated
– as well as with outside environmental activists and pollution control specialists – employees were able to initiate 17 more projects that lowered costs an
additional $5.4million.3
Shortly thereafter,in 2005, 3M’s program celebrated its 30th anniversary with
enough accumulated data to reveal that Joseph Ling had saved the company
over $1 billion in costs.
2 Understanding Waste 21
How much waste is out there?
Joseph Ling’slegacy includes not only looking forsymptoms of waste, but also
determining the causes (imagine a patient with a hacking cough going to a
doctor and being treated for the cough rather than the cancer that is causing
it and the value of understanding symptoms and causes becomes apparent).
Just as important, Ling’s whole-system approach asks every employee to get
involved in finding and eliminating waste and its causes – which also includes
non-physical forms of waste such as fraud, risk, damage, investment losses,
human error, weaknesses (or redundancies) in processing systems, poor service, lawsuits, bad customer relations, etc.
A good way to explore waste and costs and how expensive the overall waste
picture becomes is with motors. Every business contains motors; some have
thousands. Even offices contain scores of motors because motors come in
a breath-taking array of sizes from the enormous to the minuscule and are
behind just about everything that moves mechanically (e.g. a fan in a computer, a coolant pump in a refrigerator, or a machine on an assembly line). Combined, a business’s motors can account for up to 60% or more of its overall fuel
costs. Indeed, motors consume so much electricity that the amount they use
over their lifetime always costs more than the purchase price of the motors
themselves. For example, a new electric motor purchased for $1,500 can cost
as much as $13,000 a year to run and a typical 100 horsepower AC induction
motor purchased for $5,000 can require $35,000-worth of electricity to operate annually (some motors actually consume more than the amount of their
purchase price in electricity costs every week). Taking the time to purchase an
efficient motor should therefore be an integral part of the motor-buying process because just a 4% increase in efficiency can amount to more than $20,000
in electricity savings overthe life of a typical 100 horsepower motor.That being
said, these costs represent only one part of the complete picture.
Further ‘big picture’ costs that need to be added to the equation include
those associated with operations waste. The diagram below reveals the
amounts of waste inherent in a common industrial pumping system. As much
as 70% of the energy produced from burning coal is lost in the power plant due
to poorly insulated and poorly designed furnaces. From the amount of electricity that emerges from the plant, 10% is lost due to inefficiencies in the transmission lines. From what emerges out of the transmission lines, 10% can be
lost because of inefficiencies in the motor, and so on.4 It all adds up to huge
financial losses for businesses and consumers because the more that is wasted,
the more has to be purchased. And as the picture broadens, an even greater
amount of avoidable costs becomes apparent.
All together, the amount of electricity motors consume totals around 40% of
the world’s electrical power or roughly 75% of all industrial electricity usage.
And since most electricity is derived from burning coal, an examination of the
costs behind coal must be taken into account. A good example is a 2011 Harvard
22 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
University medical study by Paul Epstein (‘Full Cost Accounting for the Life
Cycle of Coal’) which concluded that coal mining and the use of coal for generating electricity coststhe United States economy between $140 and $242 billion
a year. These costs include premature deaths associated with coal mining, the
expenses of lung and heart disease, the cost of climate change and other environmental impacts as well as the negative financial effects on local economies
from lost business and tourism in dirty coal-mining areas.What has not yet been
factored in to this data is the effect coal consumption has on groundwater pollution including benzene, arsenic, mercury, lead and other coal-producing carcinogenic materials that typically find their way into household water supplies.
The study concluded that these and numerous other unseen pollution-related
health impacts could raise the total costs of mining and burning coal to $500 billion annually.
5 Indeed, clean-up costsfor a 2009 rupture of a fly ash containment
area in Harriman, Tennessee, alone (fly ash is a toxic residue left over after coal is
burned, which is often mixed with water to keep it from dissipating into the air)
are estimated to be over $1 billion (this particular disaster flooded over 300 acres
of forest, wiping out roads and railroad tracks and destroying several homes,
thereby making it one of the worst industrial accidentsin American history).6
Obviously,asthe demand for electricity (and otherforms of energy)increases,
such large amounts of waste and costs become difficult to ignore.Just asimportant, governments cannot afford to continue building power plants to compensate for wasteful infrastructure, nor can they continue to ignore big-picture
externalized costs that are traditionally dumped onto consumers.
FIGURE 2-1: First steps towards sustainability: a lesson in waste Source:
Jonathan T.Scott, New Standards for Long-Term Business Survival (ed. Walter
R. Stahel; 2011; www.sustainbusper.com): 8.
2 Understanding Waste 23
Lastly, disposal costs must be included in the mix. Motors are heavy, which
means that throwing one away can be expensive (landfill disposal costs are
usually based on weight). It’s therefore necessary to know how much it costs
to discard a motor when it reaches the end of its product life – particularly if
the local landfill site is full, or if it’s discovered that the motor contains toxins
that render it impossible to dispose of in a straightforward manner. One business throwing away its toxin-filled motors may seem insignificant, yet when
hundreds of thousands of businesses do the same, serious problems can arise
– and a similar tale can be told about virtually every tool, piece of equipment,
production process and product in business.
Putting the infrastructure in place: a call for new
standards
A common argument against change raises the question of costs – particularly
when those who choose to protect their investment in antiquated or outdated
processes insist that change should be feared. The change-should-be-feared
argument almost alwaysrelies on a ‘change is always and only an expense’supposition that incorporates ‘top-down’ economic models without considering
‘bottom-up’ models that take in to account the added savings and potential
earnings that new practices and new technologies can produce. For example,
before the passage of the American Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, ‘topdown’ theorists predicted that meeting sulphur emission targets would cost
businesses $1,500 (or more) per ton of emissions. Instead, sulphur allowances
traded at less than $100 per ton by 1996 and fell to $66 by 1999. According to
Stephan DeCanio in TheEconomics ofClimateChange,
7 sulphur emissionsthen
subsequently dropped across the United States by 37%. Just as important, electricity rates, which were predicted to rise to astronomical heights (power plants
are one of the chief creators of sulphur emissions), fell by one-eighth. Ironically, the reason why the worst-case scenarios of the top-down theorists never
materialized is because making waste more expensive resulted in the power
companies becoming more efficient, more competitive and more innovative.
The ‘change is only and always an expense’ argument continues with the
supposition that the infrastructure for necessary changes rarely exists and that
significant amounts of capital will therefore be required to introduce sustainable activity on a large scale. Although this is true, it is not a valid argument.
Consider the light bulb. When the light bulb was perfected in the late 1870s
no electrical power plants existed, no transmission lines criss-crossed towns
and countries, no houses or businesses were wired for electricity, and no lamps
were being manufactured. Nevertheless, the financial (and other) benefits of
the light bulb outweighed the cost of the infrastructure needed to support it
24 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
so the necessary capital and investment was eventually – and willingly – put
forward. For the same reason, new, government-mandated standards, coupled
with financial support (as well as the nurturing of a network of cooperating
businesses), must play a critical role in creating and promoting a more sustainable future.
In 2011, author Roger A. Pielke reiterated the principle behind this belief
when he stated in an article for the New York Times that pioneering inventions and innovations are not enough to guarantee economic progress. As
he put it, few people remember that in the United Stated during the 1800s, a
nationwide lack of standards meant that weights and measures – including
measured units of electricity – could have as many as eight definitions, which
overwhelmed industry and consumers with a confusing array of incompatible choices. Meanwhile, Germany’s standards agency, established in 1887,
was busy setting rules for everything from the contents of dyes to the process for making porcelain – with other European countries following suit.
The result was higher-quality products that helped Germany’s trade growth
exceed that of the United States in the 1890s. Pielke goes on to state that in
1901, the United States became the last major economic power to establish
an agency to set technological standards and that afterwards, a boom in
product innovation occurred in almost all aspects of life. These technological
standards not only promoted innovation, they also helped protect national
industries from falling behind those of another. Similarly, today, China, India
and other rapidly growing nations – including those in the European Union –
are adopting new standards that speed the deployment of new technologies
and products. Companies that cannot compete risk losing overseas markets
while innovative goods from other countries flood their domestic markets.
A good strategy, therefore, is for a nation to not only continue developing
higher standards and better infrastructure, but also to devise a strategy to
apply its new and tougher standards consistently and quickly. This approach
is taken by Japan’s Top Runner program, which sets energy-efficiency standards by identifying technological leaders in a particular industry and mandating that the rest of the industry keep up with its innovations. As technologies
improve, higher standards are therefore established that enable a virtuous
cycle of improvement. At the same time, government should be working with
businesses to devise further multi-dimensional standards and incentives to
ensure that consumers don’t balk at products because they sacrifice cost for
efficiency.8
One more time: why is waste elimination important?
It is unrealistic for businesses to expect their hard-earned profits (not to mention taxpayer money) to indefinitely cover the expenses associated with waste.
2 Understanding Waste 25
Simply put, economic prosperity and job security are compromised when the
financial damage from the waste a business creates exceeds the good that the
business generates. Moreover, businesses and industries that fail to comprehend the issue of finite resources and increases in resource prices should elicit
no sympathy when they claim they ‘didn’t see it coming’. No manager wakes
up and suddenly discovers that his or her business can no longer afford its raw
materials, or that consumers will no longer tolerate wasteful practices and toxic
products, or that a new law has made certain chemicals or dangerous forms of
production illegal. Instead, what usually happens is that management chose to
ignore the warning signs – and now it can no longer afford to sit passively on
the sidelines and do nothing.
WASTE ELIMINATION IN THE NEWS (2018)…
…In his annual letter to S&P 500 companies, CEO of Blackrock (Larry Fink) asked 
business leaders to communicate to shareholders their annual strategic frame works for 
long-term value creation and explicitly affirm that their boards have reviewed those 
plans.
…Walmart told investors that a small change to its plastic bags saved the company 
approximately $20-million in 2017. Shortening paper receipts given to customers saved 
an additional $7-million.
…China announced that it will spend $369-billion on renewable energy by 2020 and 
will cut its use of coal by 30% (103 proposed new coal plants will be cancelled as part 
of this incentive). In similar news, China built the world’s largest land-based and 
floating solar ‘farms’ in 2017.
…McDonald’s has posted a statement on its corporate website pledging to end the use 
of polystyrene foam packaging by the end of 2018. 
…Norway’s $1-trillion Wealth Fund is forcing banks to disclose the carbon footprint of 
loans and will divest its portfolio away from fossil fuels.
…New research from Morgan Stanley released in July of 2017 estimated that 
renewable energy will be the world’s cheapest source of power in less than three years. 
In its report, the firm noted, ‘the price of solar panels has fallen 50% in less than two 
years (2016-2017).’
…Dell Computer is now making (and selling) a line of jewelry made with reclaimed 
gold recycled from computer motherboards.
…In 2018, several wastewater related bills go into effect in California including new 
licensure and regulations for ‘biocremation’ (alkaline hydrolysis), a process designed to 
safely dispose human remains more efficiently than cremation or burial.
26 The Sustainable Business: A Practitioner’s Guide
3
What the Reformer
is Up Against
With large corporations saving more
than $1 billion from waste elimination
and resource extension – and countless smaller businesses adding tens of
thousands of dollars a year (or more)
to their bottom lines by doing the same
– one would think that businesses 
around the world would be rushing to
adopt sustainable practices that reliably deliver long-term results. Unfortunately, this is not the case – and a major
reason why this appears to be so lies
within the complexity of the human
brain.
The Centerfor Research on Environmental Decisions (CRED) is a research
organization based at Columbia University. For the past several years, sciSome time between 1513 and
1532, Niccola Machiavelli, author 
of The Prince, wrote, ‘There is
nothing more difficult to carry out,
nor more doubtful of success, nor
more dangerous to handle, than
to initiate a new order of things.
For the reformer has enemies
in all those who profit from the
old order, and only lukewarm
defenders in those who would
profit from the new order – the
lukewarmness arising partly from
fear of adversaries who have the 
laws in their favour, and partly
from the incredulity of mankind
who do not believe in anything
new unless they have had actual 
experience of it.’
entists at CRED have been working to understand the mental processes that
shape human choices, behaviours and attitudes. Understanding why people behave differently when presented with simple choices is a field of study
located at the crossroads of psychology and economics, which sprang from the
work of Nobel Prize-winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman and his colleague
Amos Tversky, both of whom discovered that humans often carry a number of
3 What the Reformer is Up Against 27
biases that greatly affect decision-making.1 For example, we are generally more
averse to losses than gains and we repeatedly use short cuts to solve problems (a process called heuristics). Moreover, most of us have an inert dislike of
delayed benefits. Placed in an everyday context, this means that given a choice
Building a
Sustainable Future:
ESG Business Handbook
How Environmental, Social and Governance 
Standards Can Benefit Your Business

Building a
Sustainable Future:
ESG Business Handbook
How Environmental, Social 
and Governance Standards 
Can Benefit Your Business
Editors
Biljana Braithwaite, Western Balkans Programme Director, 
AIRE Centre/Founding Partner, Sustineri Partners 
Sabina Đapo, Western Balkans Programme Manager, the AIRE Centre 
Authors
Nevena Kostić, ESG Expert, Sustineri Partners
Amina Hujdur, Communications Specialist, the AIRE 
Centre’s Western Balkans Programme
Contributions
Elma Veledar Arifagić, Attorney at Law at dmb partners Sarajevo
Aleksandra Njagulj, Founding Partner at Sustineri Partners 
and ESG Investment Management Expert
Maša Njegovan, ESG & Sustainability Leader,
Risk Advisory at Deloitte Advisory d.o.o.
Kakanj cement plant
Smrčak 
ETMAX
Klika
Design
Kliker Dizajn – Marko Milićević
Copyright © 2023 The AIRE Centre and UNDP Bosnia and Herzegovina
The “Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook” was produced as 
part of the AIRE Centre Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) standards 
– introduction for the businesses project, with financial support of the United 
Nations Development Programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Contents
1. Acknowledgments ............................................................................................. 7
2. Welcome to the ESG Business Handbook!....................................................8
3. What are ESG standards, and why do
you need them for your business? ................................................................... 10
4. Evolution of ESG standards .......................................................................... 14
5. From CSR to ESG: Stepping up from
voluntary to the regulated action ..................................................................... 16
6. ESG investing as a catalyst of sustainable transition ............................... 18
7. Sustainable Pathways for Bosnia and Herzegovina:
UNGC, PRI, SDGs, UNGP and Paris Agreement ............................................20
The UN Global Compact.............................................................................................. 20
The Principles for Responsible Investment..............................................................21
Sustainable Development Goals.................................................................................21
The UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights ............................24
The Paris Agreement......................................................................................................24
8. ESG and SDG: Connected paths to a sustainable future .........................26
9. ESG standards and regulatory frameworks: The EU perspective ............29
EU Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD)....................................29
EU Sustainable Finance Regulation – EU Taxonomy and SFDR......................32
EU Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence (CSDD).............................................33
EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) ............................................34
International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB)..............................................35
10. Overview of ESG Standards in BiH’s Regulatory Framework .................36
11. Getting started with ESG...............................................................................39
12. Overview of Reporting Frameworks ..........................................................42
13. Case study: Key trends identified among the past
winners of the UNDP SDG Business Pioneers Awards..................................44
Kakanj Cement: Unlikely Sustainability Hero
Transforming the Cement Industry.............................................................................44
Smrčak: Empowering Communities through
Sustainable Business Practices ..................................................................................47
ETMAX: Paving the Way for Renewable Energy Transition in BiH...................49
Klika: The New Era of Sustainability ...........................................................................51
14. How to Utilise Environmental, Social and
Governance Standards ― Take Action Now.....................................................55
15. Recommendations.........................................................................................58
ESG Strategy .....................................................................................................................58
Reporting............................................................................................................................59
Annex 1: History of global environmental and social governance: Overview 
of the UN conventions and instruments ......................................................... 61
List of Acronyms .................................................................................................65
Bibliography: Want to learn more? ...................................................................67
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
7
1. Acknowledgments
The “Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook” was produced 
as part of the AIRE Centre’s Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) 
standards – introduction for the businesses project, with financial support of 
the United Nations Development Programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The 
handbook was produced by the AIRE Centre team led by Biljana Braithwaite 
(Western Balkans Programme Director) and Sabina Đapo (Western Balkans 
Programme Manager). The authors of the handbook are Nevena Kostić (ESG 
Expert) and Amina Hujdur (Communications Specialist), while Elma Veledar 
Arifagić (Attorney at Law at dmb partners Sarajevo) made a special contribution 
in providing an overview of the domestic legal framework in relation to this topic.
The AIRE Centre team would like to thank Aleksandra Njagulj, founding 
partner at Sustineri Partners and ESG investment management expert, and Maša 
Njegovan, ESG and Sustainability Leader at Deloitte Risk Advisory department, 
for their contributions and sharing their expertise and knowledge. 
Special thanks go to the Kakanj cement plant, Smrčak, ETMAX, and Klika 
for generously sharing their experiences, knowledge and practices concerning 
sustainability and ESG standards.
The AIRE Centre team would like to express its gratitude to the United Nations 
Development Programme for the funding provided and to the representatives of 
the United Nations Development Programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
8
2. Welcome to the ESG 
Business Handbook!
The objective of this handbook is to inform the businesses in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina (BiH) about environmental, social, and governance (ESG) 
standards and the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
It is a valuable resource containing relevant information and practical advice 
for businesses and other institutions on how to most effectively implement 
ESG standards, assess performance and define goals and action plans to 
contribute to a more sustainable future. As the world faces unprecedented 
social, environmental, and economic challenges, it has never been more 
critical that businesses take a more (pro)active role and contribute to alleviating 
these issues. Companies play a crucial role in shaping the world we live in. By 
adopting ESG practices and aligning their strategies with the SDGs, they can 
also become a part of positive human rights and environmental changes and 
enhance their long-term financial performance. Lastly, this handbook is intended 
for businesses of all sizes and sectors, with an emphasis on small and medium 
enterprises, and we encourage them to use it to drive positive change.
This handbook will provide you with relevant information to get you 
started on your ESG journey. The document begins with a summary of the 
ESG standards evolution, looking at the key historical milestones that led 
to their introduction and rising impact. It also provides an overview of the 
UN conventions and instruments concerning sustainability, followed by a 
more in-depth look into the link between the ESG standards and SDGs, 
emphasising trends and potential options for ESG standards to contribute 
to the more robust engagement of the business sector in implementing the 
SDG objectives. The handbook also provides an overview of European 
Union (EU) instruments, followed by the current state of legislation and 
practices in BiH. The final section of this document provides clear and 
achievable recommendations and practical advice for implementing ESG
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
9
standards, covering topics such as materiality assessment, gap analysis, 
defining ESG goals and indicators, formulating ESG strategy as well as 
recognising risks and opportunities. 
As some companies in BiH are already pioneering sustainable development 
in BiH, this handbook highlights positive examples of practices implemented 
by past winners of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) SDG 
Business Pioneers Award in BiH. 
There is no doubt that more and more businesses are no longer only 
expected to perform well but also to “do good” and “do no harm”. No matter 
the size, the businesses have the duty to respond and contribute to the solution 
for the key regional and global challenges such as climate change (and its 
implications evident in the rise in sea level, increased risks of droughts and 
floods, and threats to biodiversity), lack of equity and inclusion, corruption, etc.
Furthermore, this is becoming a core issue of investors’ and consumers’ 
behaviour, leading to their decisions to consciously only do business with those 
companies whose practices align with their values.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
10
3. What are ESG standards, 
and why do you need 
them for your business? 
ESG standards evaluate businesses’ sustainability and impact on 
environmental, social and governance issues far beyond their financial 
performance. Some of the standards are imposed by laws and regulations of 
the country where the business operates, and others result from stakeholders’ 
expectations and investors’ pressure due to growing concerns regarding human 
rights and environmental issues. But first, we need to break down and explain 
what it stands for. 
Environmental standards concern businesses’ impact on 
the environment through their consumption of energy and 
raw materials, i.e., the resources they need to operate. These 
standards cover many factors, including how businesses 
contribute to climate change, pollution, waste, natural 
resource depletion, etc. For instance, business strategies 
to reduce negative environmental impact can involve goals of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions, investing in renewable energy, and promoting the 
use of sustainable resources. On the other hand, every business needs energy 
and resources and is affected by the environment’s state, including floods, 
droughts, and biodiversity devastation. 
Social standards concern the impact businesses make on 
society. Every company operates within a broader, diverse 
community, so its operations and social issues are deeply 
intertwined. These factors are related to labour and human 
rights, inclusion, equality, and community development. 
For instance, positive social impacts can be seen within 
businesses that promote workplace diversity and inclusion, ensure fair labour 
practices throughout their supply chains, and engage with local communities.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
11
Governance standards concern practices and procedures 
adopted and implemented within a business to ensure 
it follows the laws and standards set out by its relevant 
stakeholders. These standards are measures by actions 
business takes to ensure fair and transparent management, 
information disclosure, prevention of corruption, enabling 
diversity, and creating equal opportunity (focusing on decision-making positions 
held by historically marginalised categories of society), transparent decisionmaking processes, cybersecurity, privacy, etc.
For a long time, these standards were viewed as a “nice to have” ambition 
businesses should strive for. Companies now stand to gain or lose a lot, 
depending on whether they successfully incorporate ESG standards and 
practices. Multiple surveys show that more than 80% of investors are looking 
into the ESG standards of a company when considering potential investments. A 
growing body of research shows that sustainable investment funds, on average, 
over the long term, achieve comparable or even better financial returns than 
conventional investments. Businesses that consider ESG standards are also 
more likely to identify and mitigate risks associated with environmental, social, 
and governance issues and are also more likely to innovate and develop new 
products and services to address these concerns. Investors in the region and 
BiH are starting to push this agenda forward as well, focusing on the business 
case for the ESG and its impact on the environment and society. 
Furthermore, customers, employees, and other stakeholders expect 
businesses to contribute to the overall effort due to growing awareness of 
sustainability importance. For instance, recent research shows that consumers 
are shifting their spending toward products with ESG-related labels and are even 
likely to spend more for such products. An increasing number of people, especially 
newer generations, are likely to base their decisions on whether they will invest, 
work for, or buy services or products from a business based on its practices and 
values. The importance of ESG standards will likely continue to grow, and those 
businesses that fall behind will stay behind. The ESG movement has already 
resulted in tangible steps evident in legislation imposing binding obligations on 
corporate actors regarding human rights and environmental standards. In some 
countries, such as those in the EU, they have already become mandated. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
12
Businesses should care to include ESG standards when preparing 
strategies in order to: 
• Respond to growing investor pressure.
• Meet stakeholder expectations.
• Get ahead by contributing to innovation.
• Comply with relevant legislation.
• Ensure long-term sustainability.
There is an urgent need to examine how ESG standards are operationalised in 
BiH and the whole Western Balkans. These jurisdictions face ongoing pressure to 
harmonise their respective legislation with the EU acquis. In addition, the recently 
adopted Green Agenda for the Western Balkans, Carbon Border Adjustment 
Mechanism, and Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive will significantly 
impact businesses in the region. Due to high unemployment levels, attracting 
foreign investment has been prioritised as a matter of state policy. Finally, the 
numerous examples of public scandals and challenges made on environmental 
and human rights grounds in the region are a stark reminder that insufficient 
attention to the potential negative impacts of business endeavours can result in 
social upheaval and political instability. At the same time, the presence of major 
multinational investors in the region who voluntarily subscribe to best practices 
and further EU-conditioned investment opens the space for broader integration 
and implementation of sustainability principles.
In fact, BiH is experiencing an increasing awareness and adoption of ESG 
standards across its business landscape. However, the level of application 
varies and is influenced by several factors, including the ownership structure of 
companies and the regulatory environment. With the country’s main economic 
partners, such as EU countries, and to a lesser extent United States of America 
(USA) and Asian countries, introducing new regulations impacting businesses, 
the pressure to adhere to ESG standards is further amplified. Domestically 
owned companies in BiH are gradually recognising the importance of ESG 
factors. However, their level of implementation is relatively lower compared to 
foreign-owned companies. This discrepancy can be attributed to various factors, 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
13
as domestically owned companies are more likely to have limited access to 
resources and expertise, lack of awareness about the potential benefits of ESG 
integration, and lack of domestic legal frameworks promoting ESG practices. On 
the other hand, there are multiple reasons why subsidiaries of foreign companies 
operating in BiH are demonstrating a higher level of ESG implementation, 
including the influence of the parent company’s established ESG policies and 
practices, adherence to international standards and guidelines, and the pressure 
to meet the ESG expectations set by their headquarters or home countries.
Want to learn more about how the main economic partners of Western 
Balkans are already applying ESG standards when conducting business 
and examples of good and bad practices in this region? Check out why 
ESG standards are relevant for Western Balkans.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
14
4. Evolution of ESG standards 
The evolution of standards for monitoring, influencing, and controlling 
business’s environmental and social impact is heavily intertwined with major 
historic man-made ecological disasters or social upheavals concerning labour 
rights. For instance, the Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster in 1986 
immensely raised public awareness of the environmental and social impacts 
of nuclear power. In the 1970s, a worldwide uprising against the apartheid 
regime in South Africa led to one of the most prominent examples of selective 
disinvestment. 
Social turmoil surrounding these, and many other similar historical events, 
had led to a re-evaluation of the role and responsibilities of businesses. This 
movement challenged the predominant perception at the time that companies 
must act in their self-interest of only generating monetary profit. It started 
promoting a different vision of the company’s value which can be seen through 
practices that positively impact its employees, the broader public and the 
environment. 
However, it was not until the relatively recent “wake-up call” embodied in 
the undeniable devastation of the planet that the organisations, boards, and 
leaders asked themselves ― are we doing enough? Most notably, in 2019, Larry 
Fink, chief executive officer (CEO) of one of the world’s largest investment firms, 
BlackRock, published a letter for his shareholders stating that “in today’s globally 
interconnected world, a company must create value for and be valued by its full 
range of stakeholders to deliver long-term value for its shareholders”. The same 
year, the Business Roundtable, an association of CEOs of leading companies in 
the USA, overturned the two-decade old-policy statement that a corporation’s 
principal purpose was maximising shareholder return and adopted the new 
Statement on the Purpose of a Corporation stating that “companies should 
serve not only their shareholders but also deliver value to their customers, invest 
in employees, deal fairly with suppliers and support the communities in which 
they operate”.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
15
As public awareness of environmental and human rights issues has grown, 
ESG standards have gained popularity. They are now increasingly viewed as 
a necessary, and in some cases even mandated, way of conducting business. 
Success is no longer considered in isolation from social and environmental 
sustainability ― rather, they are viewed as an interconnected aspect of the longterm success of companies. 
Businesses are no longer only expected to perform well but also to 
do no harm.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
16
5. From CSR to ESG: 
Stepping up from voluntary 
to the regulated action 
In the 1970s, following the increasing concerns about the social and 
environmental impacts of business activities, companies began to publish 
corporate social responsibility (CSR) reports that evaluate their ethical, 
environmental, philanthropic and economic implications. Initially, these reports 
focused on short-term, admirable actions, such as charities, volunteering, and 
involvement in the community. Furthermore, they were published separately 
from companies’ financial reports, showing how the interconnection between 
economic performance and external factors pertaining to environmental, social 
and governance standards was still poorly understood at the time. However, in 
the late 1990s and early 2000s, as the connection between these two factors 
began to gain recognition, companies began to be encouraged to incorporate 
and link their non-financial actions with information concerning their financial 
results. 
As the movement gained momentum, companies began to report on their 
environmental and social impacts, sharing statistics and other information 
concerning greenhouse gas emissions, energy consumption, water usage, and 
employee diversity. However, CSR reporting has also gained a bad reputation
for being used by businesses as a “PR tool for greenwashing”. With the 
emergence and popularisation of ESG standards that covered broader factors 
beyond CSR reporting, investors and other stakeholders began to use it as a 
framework for estimating businesses’ sustainability and ethical impact. Unlike 
CSR, ESG strategies publicly define specific goals with quantifiable results. 
Being quantified and measured, these strategies are formulated to demonstrate 
a company’s actual activities and successes and cannot be easily manipulated.
However, it was not only investors who looked into emerging new trends 
concerning ESG standards. Countries such as the United Kingdom, Australia, 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
17
France, the Netherlands, Germany, and Norway, soon began adopting legislation 
that imposes binding obligations on corporate actors regarding human rights 
and environmental standards. For example, both the USA and EU have imposed 
regulations to limit the emission of greenhouse gases, excessive water usage 
and other actions that are detrimental to the environment. The Clean Air Act in 
the USA sets out to regulate industries’ air pollution by expanding the authority of 
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency so that it can take effective action 
against this problem. The EU’s Emissions Trading System introduced a “cap and 
trade” system, setting out “the cap” on the total amount of certain greenhouse 
gases that the EU operators can emit and also allowing them to “trade” with 
one another as needed. European countries have especially been proactive in 
imposing regulations that concern and promote ESG standards. For instance, 
France became the first country to introduce mandatory climate changerelated reporting for institutional investors, Germany introduced Sustainability 
Code that provides a framework for reporting non-financial performance, and 
the Netherlands adopted a Corporate Governance Code with principles and 
best practices focused on promoting good governance of their companies.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
18
6. ESG investing as a catalyst 
of sustainable transition 
ESG Investing is often referred to as sustainable investing, and it describes 
the process of looking into environmental, social, and governance factors, 
alongside financial aspects, when making investment decisions. As previously 
noted, it is based upon the growing recognition that a company’s financial 
performance is interconnected with environmental and social factors and that 
sustainable investing decisions will turn a greater profit in the long run. There 
has been a significant surge in ESG investing around the world. According to 
research by Bloomberg Intelligence, ESG assets surpassed 35 trillion United 
States dollars (USD) in 2020, followed by 41 trillion USD in 2022, and may even 
surpass 50 trillion by 2025. 
Research shows that global ESG assets may surpass one-third of all 
asset holdings globally. 
More than 80% of investors consider ESG factors in their investment 
processes, and 54% of investors believe better ESG practices by 
companies result in stronger returns/validations over time.
In fact, by considering ESG factors, investors can get a more holistic view
of the companies they want to invest in. Consequently, ESG investing can 
successfully pave the way for businesses to transition into a sustainable future. 
Firstly, ESG-conscious investors (and consumers) can motivate firms to adopt 
sustainable practices. Secondly, they can also play a role in addressing social 
and environmental issues by investing in businesses and encouraging innovation 
that can positively impact these problems. Lastly, ESG-conscious investors can 
even strongly advocate for legislative changes promoting sustainable practices, 
such as transitioning to a low-carbon economy or improved labour standards.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
19
For example, a fast shift is coming to BiH in the world of finance with the 
introduction of so-called green bonds. The projects financed by the banks will 
be subjected to strict environmental impact assessments. Some banks with a 
big presence in the region have stopped financing projects in the field of coal 
mining, while other fossil technologies have a very low share in their portfolio. 
Projects focused on the promotion of investment through the implementation 
of ESG standards are becoming common in the region showing interest of 
investors to support levelling the playing field. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
20
7. Sustainable Pathways for 
Bosnia and Herzegovina: 
UNGC, PRI, SDGs, UNGP 
and Paris Agreement 
BiH is actively engaged in multiple global initiatives focused on sustainability 
and responsible business practices, and while the implementation of some is 
already transforming the country, the implementation of others remains lacking. 
Nevertheless, the UN Global Compact (UNGC), Sustainable Development Goals, 
Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI), UN Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights (UNGP), and the Paris Agreement all play pivotal roles in 
driving sustainable development, encouraging protection of human rights and 
responsible corporate citizenship, and addressing environmental challenges in 
the country.
⊲ The UN Global Compact
The UN Global Compact is the largest corporate sustainability initiative, 
consisting of ten principles aimed at promoting responsible corporate 
citizenship regarding human rights, labour, environment, and anti-corruption. 
This Initiative has gained considerable attention. Currently, it is joined by more 
than 16,000 business actors and 3,800 non-business actors helping alleviate 
extreme poverty, address labour issues, and reduce environmental risks. The 
UN Global Compact is based on the idea that what is good for society is also 
good for business, recognising that corporate success is interdependent with 
stable economies and healthy, educated, and skilled workforces. Furthermore, 
it encourages companies to adopt sustainable and socially responsible policies 
and practices in alignment with the SDGs. At the moment, there are 14 active 
participants from BiH, consisting mostly of small or medium-sized enterprises 
and NGOs. Nevertheless, UNDP continues to promote the UN Global Compact, 
mostly through the application process for the SDG Business Pioneers Award in 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
21
BiH, as it gives all companies a “blueprint” for an annual report recognised by 
the UNGC.
Want to discover how the UN Global Compact supports businesses? 
Find out how you can benefit from joining the Initiative.
⊲ The Principles for Responsible Investment
The Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) is one of the world’s 
leading proponents of responsible investment, as it supports its global network 
of investors to incorporate ESG standards into their investment and ownership 
decisions. This Initiative consists of six principles that guide investors in 
making responsible investment decisions using ESG standards and provides a 
framework that makes it easier to determine if their investments are sustainable 
and if their financial decisions are responsible.
⊲ Sustainable Development Goals
Overall UN’s efforts toward creating instruments for joint action of all member 
states toward sustainability and alleviation of prominent global social and 
environmental issues are encompassed in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, adopted in 2015. This agenda consists of 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals to be achieved by the state as well as non-state actors by 
2030.
The goals are interconnected and often overlapping, emphasising that 
environmental, social and economic issues and opportunities are interrelated 
and can all be considered crucial steps for sustainable development. 
The SDG Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the crucial document for 
implementing the SDGs, as it outlines the broader development directions for 
the country, containing guides for strategic planning processes in all decisionmaking levels of the country, encompassing the state level, as well as the entity 
level, the Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
22
the Brčko District of BiH. This framework serves as a guide for governments at 
all levels and the society in BiH to define their priorities, measures, and activities 
according to their competencies, ensuring that their contributions align with the 
achievement of Agenda 2030.
The development of the SDG Framework was based on a comprehensive 
situation analysis of sustainable development in the country. This analysis 
considers key development trends, opportunities, and obstacles, taking into 
account the country’s accession to the EU. Additionally, extensive consultations 
were conducted with representatives from institutions at all levels of government 
and socio-economic stakeholders. The SDG Framework in BiH identifies three 
pathways of sustainable development for the country: Good Governance and 
No 
Poverty
Zero 
Hunger
Quality
Education
Gender
Equality
Economic
Growth
Climate
Action
Life
Below
Water
Partnership
for the
Goal
Life
on Land
Peace,
Justice,
& strong
Institution
Reduced
Inequalities
Sustainable
Cities
Responsible
Consumption
Clean
Energy
Industry,
Innovation,
 Infrastructure
Clean
Water
& Sanitation
Good Health
& Well Being
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
GOALS
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
23
Public Sector Management; Smart Growth; and Society of Equal Opportunities. 
It also includes two horizontal themes, namely Human Capital for the Future and 
the “Leave no one behind” Principle.
Within each of these development pathways, specific accelerators and drivers 
are defined to bring about the desired changes by 2030. This means that the 
framework establishes the necessary actions and strategies to be implemented 
to achieve the SDGs. Furthermore, the SDG Framework in BiH aligns with Agenda 
2030 and the commitments made by the country. It goes beyond setting broader 
development directions and also determines concrete targets and indicators to 
measure progress towards the SDGs. The Imagine 2030 initiative, launched in 
2016, facilitates extensive consultations in BiH on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs. 
Over 5,000 citizens have participated so far, making it the primary tool for 
advocacy, and raising awareness of the SDGs in the country.
Want to learn how SDGs can create value for your business? Check 
out the article on the business case for SDGs.
The private sector plays a vital role in accomplishing the SDGs through their 
social responsibility, green business, and innovation. It also stands to gain a 
lot, as research shows that achieving the SDGs is also connected to business 
success. Furthermore, SDGs are formulated so that there is significant synergy 
between different goals; for instance, the goal of climate actions is interconnected 
with goals concerning good health and well-being, clean water and sanitation, 
affordable and clean energy, sustainable cities and communities, responsible 
consumption and production, life below water, life on land, etc. Currently, 
member states are in the process of localisation and implementation of these 
goals, and the Sustainable Development Report offers a global assessment of 
countries’ progress towards achieving the SDGs. 
SDGs have an estimated global market potential of around $12 
trillion for companies.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
24
⊲ The UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights 
The United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
(UNGP) are a set of guidelines for States and companies to prevent, address 
and remedy human rights abuses committed in business operations. Guiding 
Principles rest on three equally important pillars: the States’ duty to protect 
human rights, the corporate responsibility to respect human rights, and the 
duty of both States and businesses to provide access to remedy for victims of 
business-related abuses.
In BiH, there are constitutionally guaranteed rights to legal remedies, 
encompassing not only employees directly affected by human rights violations 
within companies but also individuals indirectly impacted, such as the local 
population in areas where business activities take place. Relevant laws in 
BiH, which will be elaborated in more detail in the letter part of this handbook, 
cover various aspects of human rights in business, including gender equality, 
discrimination prohibition, labour and social policies, environmental protection, 
ownership, public health, anti-corruption measures, and more. 
In November 2022, BiH was the first country of the region that took a 
proactive step towards implementing the UNGP, when the Council of Ministers 
of BiH adopted the Proposal of Framework Guidelines for Implementation of 
the UNGP for the period 2021-2025, demonstrating the country’s commitment 
to enhancing human rights protection in the business sector. 
⊲ The Paris Agreement
The same year SDGs were adopted, another crucial agreement strived to 
ignite global action toward combating global warming. Paris Agreement is the 
first legally binding international treaty concerning climate change, adopted by 
195 parties, who agreed to limit the increase in global average temperature 
to below 2°C or even 1.5°C, peak global emissions as soon as possible, and 
rapidly reduce them to achieve a balance between emissions and removals 
by the second half of the century. Implementing this Agreement is embedded 
in economic and social transformation. Governments agreed to regularly 
assess and report their collective progress towards the Agreement’s long-
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
25
term goals and track and report their individual progress through a transparent 
and accountable system. Since 2020, countries have been submitting their 
national climate action plans or nationally determined contributions (NDCs). BiH 
published its first NDC in 2020 and sublimated revisions in 2021. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
26
8. ESG and SDG: Connected 
paths to a sustainable future 
The resemblance of the ESG factors to the UN’s SDGs is no coincidence. 
Indeed, ESG is an integral part of SDGs ― that is, SDGs identify the objectives, 
and ESG offers the methods and processes for achieving them. In other words, 
ESG promotes businesses’ role in overall global sustainable development 
and identifies contributing practices that companies can incorporate into 
their operations, products, and services. ESG standards represent a lifetime 
opportunity to bring together SDG goals and new legal and market requirements 
for businesses and use them as a cohesion factor. 
A growing number of companies are considering SDGs when developing 
business strategies. Even though they are not legally obliged to implement them, 
businesses are beginning to recognise the long-term benefits of striving for 
these goals. As it was previously elaborated, the business case for embracing 
these goals is clear ― not only are the companies affected by environmental 
and social issues, but global sustainability is also in the best interest of their 
business and companies that do not comply with these goals risk their corporate 
image, which may turn way existing and new stakeholders (primarily investors 
and consumers). 
While both SDGs and ESG standards aim to achieve long-term 
sustainable growth, the difference between them is:
SDGs
• Are broader in scope and consist of 17 goals that aim to address global 
challenges such as poverty, inequality, and climate change by 2030.
• Apply to everyone, including state and non-state actors.
• Are a globally adopted goal framework.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
27
ESG standards
• Represent principles focused on environmental, social and governance 
impacts of businesses.
• Apply primarily to the business sector, companies, and investors.
• Do not have a standardised global framework.
• Can be viewed as one of the methods and processes for achieving 
SDGs.
Furthermore, SDGs are attracting the business community’s attention as 
striving for them also has the potential to expand one’s business. According 
to the Business & Sustainable Development Commission report, the SDGs 
could generate 12 trillion USD in business savings and revenue by 2030 
across energy, cities, food and agriculture, and health and well-being goals. 
The report also estimates that 380 million new jobs will be linked to these four 
sectors in the next ten or fifteen years. Furthermore, the research shows that 
compliance with SDG goals also attracts consumers, as Global research by 
PwC found that 78 percent of customers are more likely to buy the goods and 
services of companies that had signed up to the SDGs.
Businesses stand to significantly gain from aligning their business 
strategies with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals and complying 
with Environmental, Social and Governance standards, such as: 
• Better reputation.
• New business opportunities and collaborations.
• Better risk management. 
• Attracting investors and consumers.
When it comes to Western Balkans countries, within the 193 UN member 
states that agreed to the 2030 Development Agenda, at the time of writing, 
Serbia has the highest ranking and is taking the 35th place, followed by North 
Macedonia (57th), Bosnia and Herzegovina (59th) and Albania (61st). Montenegro 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
28
has the lowest ranking at 86th place. Companies are not obliged to submit SDG 
reports. However, countries are expected to make them a central element in 
national and regional sustainability, also reflected in ESG reporting standards 
and goals. This is to say that ESG reporting can be used for Sustainable 
Development Goals. As the deadline for their fulfilment is approaching, more 
and more countries will be looking into how private businesses can contribute 
to this overall goal. 
Do you need a broader overview of the business and human rights 
regulatory landscape and information on business cases for better 
compliance with corporate actors’ human rights and environmental 
standards? Check out the publication Business, Human Rights, and 
the Environment: The Future of Sustainable Business in the Western 
Balkan.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
29
9. ESG standards and 
regulatory frameworks: 
The EU perspective
The main driver of ESG regulation in Europe is the European Union. All the 
changes happening in the EU are based on the European Green Deal, a major 
policy shift to make Europe carbon-neutral by 2050. The European Green 
Deal aims to boost the efficient use of resources by moving to a clean, circular 
economy and halt climate change, revert biodiversity loss and cut pollution. It 
outlines investments needed and financing tools available and explains how 
to ensure a just and inclusive transition. The European Green Deal covers all 
sectors of the economy, notably transport, energy, agriculture, buildings, and 
industries such as steel, cement, information, and communications technology 
(ITC), textiles, and chemicals.
The European Green Deal was approved in 2020. The plan is to 
review each existing law on its climate merits and introduce new ones.
Several countries have passed or proposed new regulations to 
improve corporate transparency and accountability around these risks 
and impacts. e.g., Germany passed a due diligence law that requires 
companies to divulge ESG risks and impacts in their supply chain.
⊲ EU Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD)
The EU Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) policy requires 
large companies and public-interest entities operating in the EU to disclose 
information on their ESG performance annually. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
30
This Directive entered into force in January 2022 and will be integrated into 
the national laws as an ESG regulation by the end of 2023. EU CSRD aims to 
improve transparency and accountability around corporate ESG performance. 
This will help investors and other stakeholders have a better understanding of 
how these companies are addressing ESG issues so that they can make more 
informed decisions.
The CSRD is mandatory for the following companies:
• Listed companies.
• Large companies that meet two of these criteria: More than 250 
employees, net turnover of more than EUR 40 million, or total assets 
exceeding EUR 20 million.
• Non-EU companies with at least one subsidiary in the EU and a net 
turnover of more than EUR 150 million.
By requiring companies to disclose finance-grade information on their 
ESG performance in their annual reports, the CSRD will improve this data’s 
transparency, credibility, and comparability. This will help investors and other 
stakeholders make informed decisions about the companies they engage with, 
channelling more capital toward sustainable businesses and investments. It 
also facilitates greater corporate accountability by encouraging companies to 
integrate ESG considerations into their business practices.
CSRD is undoubtedly relevant to companies based in Western Balkans, 
as it applies to companies registered in third countries whose turnover was 
generated in the EU. Although small and medium-sized enterprises are 
not in the direct scope of the Directive, they will nevertheless be covered 
by its scope if they do business with the companies it covers. As it is the 
duty of large companies to pass due diligence requirements through their 
value chain, small and medium-sized enterprises will certainly feel the 
burden and pressure to adapt and build their operational and financial 
capacity. For instance, Germany has already taken steps in implementing 
the CSRD/CSDD, which will significantly impact business in BiH.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
31
› How can companies comply with the EU CSRD? 
What are the ESG disclosure requirements?
To comply with the CSRD, companies must prepare a non-financial statement 
that includes information on their ESG policies, risks, and results. The specific 
content will vary depending on the size and nature of the company but could 
include policies and performance details around:
• Environmental issues include greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, energy 
consumption, waste management, and the use of natural resources.
• Social issues include employment practices, working conditions, 
diversity, health and safety, supply chain management, and community 
engagement.
• Governance structures and practices include board composition and 
diversity, executive compensation, and risk management.
Companies will need to follow a “comply or explain” approach, 
meaning they must disclose the requested ESG information or explain 
why they cannot do so. In either case, the statement must be approved 
by the board of directors and included in the annual financial report. It 
must also be audited by an independent third party to ensure accuracy 
and credibility.
This means that companies do not have to report on all aspects of the 
business if they are not related to minimum requirements (e.g., a company that 
does not generate wastewater in the production process). However, in those 
cases, companies need to comply with the report or explain principle, meaning 
that if certain elements of sustainability reports are not applicable to the company 
in question, they need to be clearly explained in sustainability reports.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
32
⊲ EU Sustainable Finance Regulation 
– EU Taxonomy and SFDR
Along with the CSRD, the EU taxonomy for sustainable activities and 
Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR) are all key policies supporting 
the European Green Deal and EU Action Plan for Financing Sustainable Growth. 
They aim to improve private sector transparency and accountability around ESG 
impacts and risks to promote sustainable economic growth and investment in the EU. 
The Taxonomy sets six environmental objectives that companies must meet 
to be considered sustainable. These include:
• Climate change mitigation: activities that reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and help prevent global warming.
• Climate change adaptation: activities that help communities and 
ecosystems cope with the effects of climate change.
• Sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources: activities 
that use water and marine resources in a way that is sustainable and 
protects the environment.
• Transition to a circular economy: activities that help create a more 
sustainable economy by reducing waste and pollution and increasing the 
use of recycled materials.
• Pollution prevention and control: activities that reduce pollution and 
protect human health and the environment.
• Protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems: activities that help 
preserve and restore the natural world and the plants and animals that live in it.
Non-listed small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are currently 
exempted from disclosing sustainability information within the EU 
Taxonomy Regulation. However, experts say that SMEs should still pay 
attention to the EU Taxonomy because it may affect them in the future. 
For example, banks and investors may ask SMEs to disclose information 
about their sustainable activities when they apply for loans or investments.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
33
The EU’s Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation aims to increase 
transparency and boost environmental and social responsibility in the finance 
industry. The SFDR requires banks, insurers, investment firms, and other 
financial institutions to report their sustainable investment practices to investors 
in a standardised format so that they can make informed decisions about their 
investments. It imposes comprehensive ESG disclosure requirements covering 
a broad range of entity- and product-level metrics.
The SFDR is intended to remove barriers that hinder investors from 
getting the sustainability data they need to make sound investment 
choices. The SFDR’s three primary objectives are as follows: 
• To enhance disclosures so that institutional investors and retail 
customers can comprehend, compare, and monitor the sustainability 
features of financial products and organisations. 
• To maintain a level playing field inside the EU, ensuring that European 
enterprises are not subjected to unfair competition from firms outside 
the EU. 
• To counteract the practice of greenwashing as it makes it more difficult 
for asset managers to “greenwash” their goods; in other words, they 
cannot just brand a product with an ESG or sustainable label without 
disclosing how this was accomplished.
Although the SFDR primarily applies to financial institutions 
operating in the EU (banks, insurers, asset managers, and investment 
businesses), the non-EU firms will be impacted indirectly due to EU 
subsidiaries, services offered in the EU, and market pressure.
⊲ EU Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence (CSDD)
EU Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence (CSDD) proposes a horizontal 
framework to foster the contribution of businesses operating in the single market 
to respect human rights and the environment by:
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
34
• establishing a corporate due diligence duty for companies to identify, 
end, prevent, mitigate, and account for negative ESG impacts in their own 
operations and value chains.
• introducing duties for directors of EU companies to set up and oversee 
the implementation of the due diligence process and integrate due 
diligence into the corporate strategy.
This regulation will affect large EU or non-EU companies active in the EU. 
Small and medium-sized enterprises, including micro-enterprises, are not in 
scope but may be impacted as contractors or subcontractors to companies 
in scope. Companies with an SME business partner must support them in 
complying with the due diligence measures.
⊲ EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM)
The CBAM mechanism aims to ensure that imported goods face the same 
cost of carbon emissions as domestically produced goods. The mechanism’s 
primary aim is to ensure that the imported goods meet the same cost of carbon 
emissions as domestically produced goods to prevent “carbon leakage”.
“Carbon leakage” occurs when in response to (higher) charges on 
emissions in the EU, businesses transfer production to other countries 
or imports from these countries replace products (which are responsible 
for lower emissions) produced domestically. CBAM will force importing 
companies to purchase CBAM certificates to pay the difference between 
the carbon price in the country of production and the EU.
CBAM is the EU’s response to the concerns that carbon leakage would 
offset the impact of the EU’s climate policies on global emissions by increasing 
emissions in other countries. CBAM aims to address this issue and create 
incentives outside the EU to step up its efforts to reduce carbon emissions.
From October 1st, 2023, to 2026, there will be a transition period where the 
CBAM obligations will be limited to reporting and will apply to goods with high 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
35
chances of carbon leakage. Starting in 2026, the transition period will end, and 
importers will start paying adjustments. 
⊲ International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB)
The International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) is an independent, 
private-sector body that develops and approves IFRS Sustainability Disclosure 
Standards (IFRS SDS). The ISSB was formed in 2021 following two consultations 
on the demand for global sustainability standards. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
36
10. Overview of ESG 
Standards in BiH’s 
Regulatory Framework
ESG standards are gaining in importance in the world of business in BiH. Their 
significance is above all the consequence of social development and continual 
social changes, as well as the identification of the need to respond adequately 
to them. One of the state’s adequate responses includes the ongoing analysis 
of the impact of the legal framework in force and the alignment of domestic law 
with the international legal framework. 
The range of human rights that can be categorised in the fields covered by 
ESG standards is wide. At the same time, international sources of law set the 
principles states are guided by when adopting new or amending their national 
regulations. Legislative achievements are the result of a process that does not 
stop and that tries to keep up with the times and the changes demonstrating the 
vital need to protect universal values in the world. BiH is under the obligation 
to defend and protect such universal values through an adequate domestic 
legal order. The international conventions and other international documents 
discussed in the handbook clearly show the path BiH should take in legislative 
terms. 
As numerous official reports show, BiH’s existing legal framework, 
particularly when the focus is on the application of ESG standards, is not 
fully aligned with all the international obligations it has assumed. The 
shortcomings identified in practice, such as the relevant institutions’ slow 
or inadequate response, are also impeding or risk to impede responsible 
business conduct. 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
37
It is therefore understandable that companies in BiH mostly apply 
the discussed principles and clear guidelines in international and 
regional sources of law voluntarily, as a result of their awareness of their 
involvement in the resolution of universal problems by local measures. 
The ESG process is, however, unstoppable. It is a trend that will become 
obligatory the moment it becomes an integral part of BiH’s aligned law. 
Although the application of ESG standards is more pronounced in the EU 
legal landscape, one cannot say that BiH regulations do not provide for the 
application of these principles, and it does not reflect on the world of business. 
The BiH regulatory framework on corporate social responsibility, especially in 
the fields of finance, manufacturing, and employment, exists and constitutes a 
legal basis, pending the adoption of “hard” laws. 
As per the environmental segment, BiH has been applying laws on 
environmental and air protection, waste and water management, laws on forests, 
and numerous by-laws at all levels of government. In addition to the regulations 
in force, the adopted strategies, emphasising, above all, international and 
regional guidelines, point to the obligation to comply with domestic regulations. 
As per the social segment, BiH has been applying labour and occupational 
health and safety laws, regulations eliminating discrimination at work, laws 
protecting gender equality, laws on social protection and numerous by-laws the 
key provisions of which are in line with universal and regional international treaties. 
The ones most important for BiH include International Labour Organization (ILO) 
conventions and recommendations, UN enactments on economic and social 
rights, Council of Europe enactments, including the case-law of the European 
Court of Human Rights, as well as EU law. 
As per governance, a number of laws in BiH governing the work of companies 
testify to the long-term reform of this area in BiH in terms of aligning the law, 
bearing in mind the earlier identified obstacles for investors, as well as with 
a view to fulfilling the obligations BiH assumed when it, inter alia, signed the 
Stabilisation and Association Agreement. Many other regulations on business 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
38
operations are in place as well, reflecting the diversity of activities companies 
are engaged in. Furthermore, companies are free to adopt their own in-house 
regulations to improve responsible governance, from the corporate governance 
code, procedures, technical and organisational measures, and oversight to other 
enactments transparently showing the company workers, as well as the public, 
that profit-making is one of the key issues but that it does not rule out the pursuit 
of other values social in character acknowledged by the business community. 
The regulatory framework in BiH is the minimum that can serve as a 
foundations for an “upgrade”. Practice has shown that companies in BiH have 
been implementing numerous activities essentially relying not only on the 
regulations, but also on other principles, guidelines, or enactments the legal 
force of which transcends BiH’s borders.
Therefore, companies will be able to develop awareness of corporate social 
responsibility and manifest their readiness for ESG reporting only if they fully 
apply domestic law. In other words, businesses operating in accordance with 
BiH regulations are already well on their way to operating in accordance with 
ESG standards. Such reporting objectively amounts to an “upgrade”, given that 
it has not become a standard for all businesses operating in BiH. For instance, 
there are companies that have embraced the CSR policy and become good 
practice examples of the process all other companies must undergo for reasons 
elaborated in detail in this handbook. 
To conclude, many companies in BiH are familiar with what ESG standards 
stand for. Depending on their needs, they: introduce strategic policies; 
develop their own studies; appoint committees or individuals with expertise in 
implementing ESG standards; apply a different approach to compliance with 
the principle of “decent work”; integrate due diligence in accordance with ESG 
criteria in their policies; identify actual and potential adverse effects on human 
rights and the environment; implement in-depth analysis measures; assess the 
effectiveness of their policies; notify the public of their activities in the light of 
ESG and outcomes; and change their management structure in accordance with 
the highest economic and social standards. 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
39
11. Getting started with ESG
What are the benefits of a strong ESG programme in companies?
• Improved transparency and trust:  By disclosing detailed information 
about their ESG performance, companies demonstrate commitment to 
transparency, which helps build stakeholder trust. This can be particularly 
important in the modern business environment where investors, 
customers, partners, employees, and others increasingly demand 
sustainable, ethical corporate behaviour.
• Decreased costs:  A strong ESG program can decrease expenses. 
Examples include lower costs in operations, e.g., energy, water, materials, 
and waste, in human resources (HR), e.g., higher productivity and easier 
talent attraction, avoiding non-compliance penalties, more accessible 
access to capital, etc.
• Stronger competitive advantage: Investors are likelier to invest in 
companies that disclose their ESG performance. Partners and customers 
are increasingly looking for responsible companies to do business with. 
Employees want to work for and stay with companies committed to 
building a positive impact on people and the planet.
• Better risk management: Preparing ESG programmes will help 
companies identify and manage potential risks and opportunities. For 
example, a company that discloses information about its carbon emissions 
may be able to identify opportunities to reduce those emissions, mitigate 
the associated risks, and lower costs.
Everything, however, starts with the materiality assessment. So, what is 
the concept of materiality?
All the ESG reporting and changes start with the understanding of the 
concept of materiality. As explained, stakeholders and investors are inquiring 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
40
about companies’ dedication to sustainability initiatives and other activities that 
fall under the ESG umbrella. It’s essential to have answers to these questions.
A materiality assessment provides a guide or blueprint for an organisation’s 
ESG strategy. It empowers companies to easily report on the current state and 
outline future initiatives while considering business goals and risks. Companies 
use the concept of materiality to guide their sustainability strategic planning 
processes. 
There is a distinction between the concept of materiality as it refers to 
financial reporting and the concept of materiality as it refers to sustainability 
reporting. 
Regarding financial reporting, information is deemed material if its 
omission or misstatement could influence the economic decisions of 
users based on the financial statements. In contrast, in the sustainability 
context, the term materiality refers to those issues that can have significant 
repercussions on the company (both positive and negative). For example, 
the problem of water scarcity is generally considered a material issue 
for beverage companies as they rely on it to produce products and, with 
a consistent supply of inexpensive water, would likely avoid significant 
business challenges.
› Materiality Process 
Potential impact on the company
In assessment, companies should focus 
on both positive and negative impacts. Of 
course, it should focus on risks, potential 
losses, or other adverse outcomes. But 
remember the opportunities that are 
uncovered throughout the process. 
Importance to stakeholders
The more stakeholders are interviewed 
during the research and strategy phase, 
the more it will broaden the scope of the 
assessment. 
Each stakeholder group will provide new 
perspectives and insights into opportunities 
and challenges. 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
41
There is no one way to conduct a materiality assessment. Many companies 
rely on external consultants to help them, while other companies with more 
robust sustainability teams manage the process themselves. 
Generally, the process for conducting a materiality assessment includes the 
following steps: 
1. Identify and categorise the key issues
In this phase, the company should develop a long list of issues. The 
various problems that could be classified under sustainability can make it 
very hard for a company to address and manage them. For this reason, a 
company should identify and prioritise the issues that are most material to 
its business and most relevant to its stakeholders.
2. Collect data from internal and external stakeholders 
Internal stakeholders should include critical managers and business 
leaders, while external stakeholders should cover significant actors 
outside of the company, including business partners, community 
representatives, and NGOs. They should all be asked to weigh a list of 
issues by their relative importance.
3. Map and prioritise the issues 
In this step, all of the data collected from internal and external stakeholders 
is put into a model or framework and transformed into a quantitative score 
that can be used to map and prioritise issues.
4. Align the issues with management and business vision 
Once the data is collected, it can be integrated into business strategies
and risk assessments. 
5. Reporting on Progress 
Most companies publish annual sustainability reports to report on 
progress. These reports generally refer back to the materiality matrix 
and the sustainability strategy and provide an update on key metrics and 
targets. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
42
12. Overview of Reporting 
Frameworks 
Companies use several key frameworks to develop an understanding of the 
critical materiality issues they should consider and report on. The frameworks 
each have a different purpose, audience, and articulation of the materiality 
concept. 
Companies’ materiality assessment will help pinpoint which frameworks, 
goals, strategies, and portfolios align well. Several of these frameworks require 
similar data and information that, once identified, can be easily repurposed for 
additional reporting processes.
UN Global Compact (UNGC) asks companies to pledge commitment to 
its sustainability principles across human rights, labour, environment, and anticorruption. It requires signatories to produce an annual communication on 
progress (COP) that outlines progress made to embed the UNGC’s ten principles 
into strategies and operations. 
For example, check out ETMAX’s report.
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is an “international independent standards 
organisation that helps businesses, governments and other organisations 
understand and communicate their impacts on issues such as climate change, 
human rights and corruption.” 
For example, check out Klika’s report.
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) is a global coalition of 
regulators, investors, companies, standard setters, the accounting profession, 
and NGOs. 
For example, check out Titan’s report.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
43
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) sets industry-specific 
standards for corporate sustainability disclosure to ensure that disclosure is 
material, comparable, and decision-useful for investors. SASB standards address 
sustainability topics that are likely to be material and to have material impacts 
on the financial condition or operating performance of companies in an industry. 
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) is an investorfocused disclosure framework that asks companies to provide information on 
the environment’s impact on them.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
44
13. Case study: Key trends 
identified among the past 
winners of the UNDP SDG 
Business Pioneers Awards
⊲ Kakanj Cement: Unlikely Sustainability Hero 
Transforming the Cement Industry
In a world where cement factories are notorious for emitting hazardous air 
pollution and contributing to environmental degradation, one company has 
defied the norm and emerged as an unlikely hero of sustainability. Kakanj 
cement plant was founded in 1978 and has been operating since 2000 with 
the support of strategic partner Heidelberg Materials from Germany. Kakanj 
cement plant implements SDGs as a continuation of Heidelberg Cement 
Company’s corporate strategy “Sustainability Ambitions 2020” focusing on five 
environmental areas: efficient use of resources, climate protection, reduction of 
environmental impacts, management and promotion of biodiversity, sustainable 
construction setting the highest standards than local legislation.
For two years in a row, 2019 and 2020, Kakanj cement plant won the award 
SDG Business Pioneer for their contribution in both “People” and “Resources 
and Environment” categories, and for their commitment to integrating SDGs 
into all business segments of their operations. In the following years within 
the programme Kakanj cement plant became the mentor to other companies 
devoted to fulfilling sustainable development goals.
The standards that Kakanj cement plant implements relate to the quality 
and volume of production, but also to the quality and content of the life of the 
workers in the factory and the community in Kakanj and BiH.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
45
Although Kakanj cement plant does not have a large team dedicated to the 
implementation of the ESG standards the company’s management encourages 
all employees to work and act in line with the goals of sustainable development. 
Implementation of ESG standards in the company is based on a strong 
knowledge base, data accuracy and diligent reporting.
All the employees are aware of the importance of the topic which is 
communicated throughout all levels in the company. According to their position 
employees are going through online and in-person training on environmental 
protection, health and safety, transparency, anti-corruption and many more.
The introduction of the CBAM mechanism is a good example of the importance 
of being prepared and leading the way in sustainability. Kakanj cement plant has 
been reporting according to the demanded standards since 2003, so they are 
now both prepared to disclose all the information and lead the industry with their 
example and experience.
Well-trained and dedicated employees have a significant role in the reporting 
process, especially in the medium size company like Kakanj cement plant, where 
there is a specific department dealing with it. The reporting system is not viewed 
as a burden but as an efficient toll of assessment, control, and verification. Over 
the years monitoring and reporting system in Kakanj was strengthened through 
establishing procedures and duties and now represents a base for strategic 
decisions and further development
Kakanj cement plant stands as an exquisite example of work in the 
community and for the community. Firstly, it fulfils the highest environmental 
and social standards which in industry like cement makes the foundation for 
trust and dialogue. Their trademark is transparency and openness for the 
dialogue. Representatives of the company have regular meetings with the 
community, through meetings, workshops, conferences, and as well are a part 
of the Environmental Protection Commission. Based on trust and accountability 
they are jointly opening all the topics and creating space for planning and 
cooperation.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
46
Kakanj cement plant implements high standards of environmental protection 
by using innovative technology. Today, dust emissions do not exceed 10 mg/m3, 
which is much lower than the European limit of 30 mg/m3. Since December 2003, 
Kakanj cement plant has also had the ISO 14001 certificate for environmental 
protection management, which is proof that we are on the right track in terms 
of construction, development, and further improvement of the environmental 
protection system.
In order to promote biological diversity at their mines Heidelberg Cement 
has adopted group-wide guidelines for species protection. Heidelberg Cement 
is the first company in the construction materials sector to do this. The ten 
principles set forth in these guidelines are designed to facilitate dialogue 
with environmental protection authorities and associations, as well as with the 
broader public. They are also designed to promote biological diversity and 
environmental health both during and after mining operations.
One of the examples showing support in dedication certainly is the 
cooperation between Kakanj cement plant and an export-oriented shoe 
company that led to resolving the issue of production waste. A large amount of 
shoe soles that remained unused was used as fuel in the Kakanj cement plant. 
Although this activity required additional effort from all involved, both companies 
made sure that this goal was achieved, including investment in cutting, drying, 
chemical testing of the material to ensure that it does not harm the environment 
and the transport of that material.
Kakanj cement plant has dynamic cooperation with its strategic partner 
Heidelberg Materials, in terms of ESG standards this cooperation is based on the 
transferability of innovation, application of the same standards and continuous 
capacity-building activities. All the standards achieved through that cooperation 
are overflowing in the value chain, to its suppliers, both in goods and services. 
The company is also taking part in communication with consumers, educating 
and informing them on new aspects of eco cement and other products. By raising 
awareness and providing information, the company empowers consumers 
to make environmentally conscious choices and contribute to the broader 
sustainability goals.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
47
Additionally, Kakanj cement plant actively promotes gender equality, with 
women occupying leadership positions such as vice-president, director of 
finance, and are present in the board. Moreover, women’s presence in managerial 
roles extends to production and recruitment processes, further emphasising the 
plant’s dedication to inclusivity and diversity.
Kakanj cement plant defies industry norms as an unlikely sustainability hero, 
showcasing a remarkable commitment to transforming the cement industry. 
Through dynamic cooperation with Heidelberg Materials for Germany, the Plant 
implements rigorous ESG standards, fosters employee awareness, engages 
with the community, and promotes gender equality and biodiversity. With a focus 
on transparency, innovation, and continuous improvement, Kakanj cement Plant 
serves as an inspiring example of sustainable practices, empowering workers 
and contributing to a greener future.
⊲ Smrčak: Empowering Communities through 
Sustainable Business Practices
Smrčak, located in Zvornik, is a renowned company with a rich tradition 
spanning over 35 years. Established in 1992, Smrčak has firmly positioned itself 
as a leader in the collection, processing, and selling of various produces found 
in nature, specialising in mushrooms, medicinal plants, and organic fruits and 
vegetables. With its commitment to quality, sustainability, and the preservation 
of natural habitat, Smrčak continues to thrive in the market, offering products 
derived from the region’s abundant natural resources.
Smrčak has been recognised as a winner in two categories: “Resources 
and Environment” and “People,” making them the overall winner of the SDG 
Business Pioneers Award in BiH in 2021. The company’s motivation to engage 
in this field stems from its recognition that adhering to the rules of sustainable 
development is essential for preserving the planet and ensuring the wellbeing of its inhabitants. In fact, Smrčak envisions that the successful future of 
their company is embedded in ensuring the happiness and security of their 
employees and the overall community.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
48
Although Smrčak does not have a dedicated team for sustainability, the 
company’s management encourages all employees to work, behave, and live 
in line with the goals of sustainable development. The nature of their industry 
inherently guides them in embracing such principles. In fact, sustainability 
goals were a crucial part of the business operations of Smrčak from the very 
beginning. Since its establishment, the company has been involved in the 
purchase, processing, and sale of organic mushrooms, medicinal plants, and 
forest fruits, aligning its business practices with its long-standing commitment 
to living in harmony with nature, and its focus on sustainability will continue to 
shape their future endeavours.
Innovation and technology play a crucial role in improving the business and 
products of Smrčak. For instance, the company has continuously sought out 
new products, recognising the healing potential of natural resources, they have 
invested in modern equipment and aim to ensure the highest quality production. 
A good example is that over 20 years ago they adopted innovative technology to 
collect and store bear’s garlic (Allium ursinum) and are now the largest producer 
of dried bear’s garlic in Europe.
Suppliers also play a significant role in helping Smrčak achieve its sustainability 
goals. The company educates both suppliers and workers on sustainable 
practices, particularly regarding the collection of products from nature. These 
educational efforts promote responsible behaviour, including the selection of 
contamination-free areas, waste reduction, and biodiversity preservation.
Communication on sustainability matters with the company’s team occurs 
through daily informal and formal meetings within the company. Smrčak is also 
a part of the Economic Council of Zvornik and organises training sessions for 
various stakeholders to raise awareness and share knowledge. Implementing 
sustainability goals in some cases poses challenges for Smrčak, primarily 
related to raising awareness among the general population and government 
about the importance of sustainable development for the preservation of the 
country’s nature. Smrčak noted that the lack of understanding is exemplified in 
the unharmonised legal framework of BiH related to sustainability, regulating 
fields such as collection of forest products and renewable energy sources, 
which only creates obstacles and discourages investments in such projects.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
49
Smrčak actively promotes gender equality within the company. Over 95% 
of their workforce comprises women, and women hold 50% of managerial 
positions, demonstrating the company’s commitment to empowering women in 
various roles. Through their dedication to sustainable practices, innovation, and 
gender equality, Smrčak sets a positive example for other businesses in BiH, 
showcasing how private enterprises can align their operations with the SDGs 
and ESG standards and contribute to a more sustainable future.
⊲ ETMAX: Paving the Way for Renewable 
Energy Transition in BiH
ETMAX, established in Banja Luka in 2012, is an innovative electrotechnical 
company dedicated to implementing and promoting cutting-edge electricity 
production systems. Their services encompass the design, development, and 
construction of photovoltaic power plants, better known as solar power plants, 
aimed at maximising energy efficiency and sustainability. 
ETMAX has been making waves in the field of sustainable development, 
earning recognition as the recipient of the SDG Business Pioneers Award in 
BiH for “Resources and Environment” in 2022. As a finalist in the 2023 Awards, 
ETMAX is undoubtedly paving the a way for green transition in BiH, as a 
successful “clean” energy company in the country still highly dependent on coal. 
The company’s commitment to sustainable business practices has yielded 
significant positive effects. First of all, ETMAX applied an approach of fully 
functional transition to renewable energy sources, which cover over 85% 
of its energy needs. Furthermore, the company has played a pivotal role in 
constructing the largest number of solar power plants in BiH, contributing to the 
long-term reduction of environmental pollution.
But what drives ETMAX to engage in sustainable development? Their aim 
is to ensure the functional use of renewable energy sources, particularly solar 
energy, thereby making a significant social contribution. In fact, sustainability 
goals are integrated into their business strategies that define measurable 
objectives that are easily tracked at the company level, but they also engage 
in sustainable business practices in a broader sense. For example, ETMAX 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
50
implements and continuously reviews the possibilities of effective application 
of the circular economy, recycling, and reuse of sources. To achieve its 
sustainability goals, ETMAX boasts a dedicated team that spans various fields, 
including engineers, lawyers, and economists. This collaborative effort allows 
them to manage business processes, apply good practices, and continuously 
improve their sustainable development endeavours. 
Innovation and technology play a crucial role in improving ETMAX’s business 
and products. Their ingenuity is evident in every aspect, from design and 
technological enhancements to equipping photovoltaic systems with highperformance equipment. Going the extra mile, ETMAX has even ventured into 
producing some components for their power plants and strives to use their own 
products in production as much as possible in the long run. 
ETMAX recognises the importance of suppliers in achieving sustainability 
goals. They uphold the principle of responsible business by ensuring that their 
suppliers share the same values and commitment to sustainability. Collaborating 
with global leaders in the sector, ETMAX rigorously verifies and checks practices 
to maintain high global standards and foster continuous improvement.
Both internally and externally ETMAX ensures that the company’s strategic 
goals are always clearly communicated, to the team, partners, and various 
stakeholders, including the wider public and the media. By engaging with the 
public and sharing information, ETMAX effectively showcases their sustainable 
practices, achievements, and the positive impact they bring to society and the 
environment.
ETMAX’s dedication to transparency is evident in their reporting practices. 
Since 2021, they have been reporting according to GRI standards. This allows 
them to assess the effectiveness of their sustainability practices, identify areas 
for improvement, and understand how sustainable development affects their 
overall business processes. In addition, the implementation of ISO 14001:2005, 
an internationally agreed standard that sets out the requirements for an 
environmental management system, serves as a foundation for the continued 
development of sustainability practices.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
51
Implementing sustainability goals does not come without its challenges 
and ETMAX views them as opportunities for advancement and development. 
Being in a relatively new industry, they initially faced the task of establishing 
the photovoltaic sector in their region. Looking ahead, they anticipate future 
challenges related to climate change, which only underlines the importance of 
their work toward cleaner energy production. 
In terms of the legal framework, ETMAX diligently adheres to relevant laws 
related to the environment, society, responsible management, and sustainability. 
Their business activities have a positive ecological footprint, contributing to the 
reduction of harmful emissions. As the company that has constructed the highest 
number of solar power plants in BiH, ETMAX’s work holds broader significance, 
driving awareness among the business community and the general public about 
the financial and socially responsible benefits of utilising renewable solar energy.
ETMAX’s remarkable achievements and unwavering dedication to 
sustainable development have rightfully earned them recognition as leaders in 
the field. As they continue to make good progress, their efforts will undoubtedly 
inspire other companies to embrace sustainable practices and contribute to a 
greener, more environmentally conscious future.
⊲ Klika: The New Era of Sustainability
From ensuring better quality jobs and inclusiveness at their workplace, to the 
development and application of technologies aimed at environmental protection 
and mitigating climate change — there are many ways in which Klika, a fastgrowing provider of software development services in BiH, ensures sustainability 
efforts are reflected in their operations. It comes as no surprise that in 2023 
this company was declared as a winner in the “People’’ and “Resources and 
Environment” categories for medium-sized companies, as well as the overall 
winner of UNDP’s SDG Business Pioneers Award in BiH. 
“As a company in the IT industry in BiH, we are very aware of the impact 
that our business can have on society, the environment, and resources. Our 
involvement in sustainable development is motivated by a variety of factors. We 
understand that we are part of a global community and that our decisions and 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
52
actions can have a wider impact, because the IT industry has great potential for 
innovation and the application of technological solutions that can significantly 
contribute to sustainability”, explained Dragana Mujanović, Head of Operations 
of Klika.
In particular, Klika promotes sustainability through a variety of avenues, 
including education, resource management, and social initiatives, as one of 
its main motives is to utilise its expertise, including human and technological 
capacities, to improve societal sustainability and generate positive changes. 
To stay on track with this mission, and remain proactive in their efforts, Klika 
has a special team dedicated to sustainable development, which operates 
through the Klika Foundation and the CSR program, as well as a CSR Officer 
who covers various areas, such as sustainability, resource management, social 
responsibility, and communication. Their Marketing team also develops and 
implements sustainable development strategies into their business processes, 
monitors progress towards sustainability goals, and promotes awareness and 
engagement within the company.
“Sustainability goals are fully integrated into our business strategies and 
operations. They are embedded in our corporate culture, management 
processes and at all levels of the organisation. Specific strategic goals are 
determined based on key challenges and opportunities related to sustainability 
in the IT industry in Bosnia and Herzegovina we identify in our evaluation 
process. As part of our strategic goals, we aim to reduce negative impacts on 
the environment, increase energy efficiency, promote sustainable resource 
use, support local communities and social initiatives, and promote gender 
equality. Each goal is defined and monitored by using measurable parameters 
which are shared publicly through our Corporate Social Responsibility Report”, 
explained Dragana. 
Klika’s CSR report measures their overall sustainability efforts, such 
as energy savings, waste management, social initiatives, employee 
involvement and gender equality. The report is transparent, measurable, and 
aligned with relevant international standards such as the GRI standards. At 
the moment, Klika is one of the few companies in Bosnia and Herzegovina that 
reports on its CSR activities in this way — transparency and openness underpin 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
53
Klika’s efforts to build trust and cooperation with all stakeholders, including their 
partners and the border community. 
Their efforts are, however, not without challenges, that predominantly arise 
when it comes to sustainability awareness in the wider community.
“It is necessary to continuously raise awareness and educate all community 
members about the importance of sustainability and their role in achieving these 
goals. Also, due to the size of our market and the fact that it is less proactive 
in adopting sustainability trends, it is often difficult to find suppliers who are 
already aligned with the requirements of sustainable business. Of course, we 
face technical and technological challenges, such as the implementation of new 
technologies, data monitoring and analysis and the integration of sustainability 
into digital platforms”, explained Dragana. 
Gender equality is one of the main pillars of Klika’s effort to ensure an inclusive, 
supportive, and empowering workplace, which they ensure by adopting and 
continuously improving company policies that promote gender equality, 
prohibiting discrimination on any basis, and strategically dealing with these 
important matters. 
“We have policies and practices that promote gender equality and support 
the professional development of women (such as paid maternity leave), and 
we do not discriminate in any way when selecting candidates — we have 
zero tolerance for discrimination on any basis. Our Code of Ethical Conduct 
is mandatory and contractually stipulated, with prescribed sanctions in case of 
violation/non-compliance. Any employee who faces or witnesses any violation 
of the Code of Conduct must notify the relevant department in writing and file an 
official complaint accordingly”, said Dragana.
“We encourage the active participation of women in decision-making 
and project management, and we are proud of the fact that gender equality 
is evident in our highest management structure — the Strategic Board.
We actively work to raise awareness of the importance of gender equality and 
encourage an inclusive work culture where diversity is valued and where every 
person has equal opportunities to succeed”, she added. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
54
From their sustainable business practices to innovative approaches for 
ensuring the environment and communities are not only protected but also 
positively impacted, there is much to learn from Klika about the new era of 
sustainability. Awareness of ESG standards is widely understood throughout their 
team, benefiting the overall goal immensely, as it allows for more comprehensive 
and proactive solutions. 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
55
14. How to Utilise 
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Standards 
― Take Action Now
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have 
a crucial role in creating jobs, driving innovation, and leading gross domestic 
product (GDP) growth. SMEs in BiH are generating more than 60% of total value 
added and almost 70% of total employment. Adopting the ESG agenda early and 
paying attention to developing an ESG strategy can have significant financial, 
risk and reputational benefits. 
Those SMEs that become early adopters will be best placed to prosper and 
avoid scenarios in which a rushed ESG framework will be put into place when 
new ESG regulations do take effect, or investors start to regularly ask for their 
ESG plans.
SMEs that prioritise ESG today are putting themselves in a better position 
to  enter new markets, expand in existing ones, and ensure their long-term 
success.
If SMEs want to advance with ESG they shouldn’t simply copy large 
companies’ strategies, but they can certainly benefit from their work. For 
example, although SMEs do not have the same level of resources or influence 
to drive ESG objectives through their supply chains, they can benefit from the 
work the larger players in their markets have done as part of their own ESG 
commitments. For example, SMEs can use these larger players’ supply chains to 
ensure they partner with suppliers that adhere to best practices.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
56
Some practical steps that SMEs can take:
• Leadership ― It is clear that the ESG journey has to start at the top, followed 
by building a team that is dedicated to the values promoted by ESG and 
equipping them with the resources required to make a difference.
• Purpose ― Defining and communicating companies’ purpose and 
committing to principles can build the company’s values and accountability. 
For example, through the United Nations Global Compact SMEs can 
commit to the environmental, human rights, labour, and anti-corruption 
standards and use its mechanism and network. 
• Metrics ― Metrics and accurate data are the key to creating meaningful 
ESG strategy. It is not necessary to measure everything, but it is vital to 
measure crucial things. If the industry that SME is in has clear leaders in 
the ESG their experience might be a good starting point and source of 
inspiration.
• Monitoring ― Regular progress monitoring ensures continued progress 
but also creates early awareness of changes in standards, regulations, and 
certification. SMEs can accomplish this by establishing ESG committees 
or adding responsibilities to existing committees.
• Communication ― ESG standards could be key for managing risks, from 
reputational to legal. It is important to communicate the ESG standards 
internally within the organisation, as well as externally to customers, to 
intermediaries, banks, and through the whole value chain.
• Transparency ― Without transparency and honesty in the reporting it is 
impossible to track the progress and benefit from the work that is done 
well. It might be appealing to sugar-coat data, but at some point, due 
diligence will show that, and what should have successful progress will 
be seen as a failure. 
Small and medium-sized businesses are well known for their agility and 
innovation but incorporating ESGs can be a significant burden for the SMEs. 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
57
SMEs that fall behind on ESG risk losing valuable opportunities with major 
regional and international companies.
Despite their impact, many are not yet fully engaged in environmental, 
social, and governance issues. It is easy to understand why as they have fewer 
resources, and they just can’t place ESGs high on the to-do list.
Naturally, SMEs are far more likely to prioritise more immediate financial and 
development concerns than they are to develop a long-term ESG strategy.
But, what is important is that many SMEs are implementing the ESG standards 
without putting them into the framework, and could significantly benefit from the 
formalisation and acknowledgement. All that SMEs might be doing to stop or 
minimise any harmful effects of business on the environment, treating employees 
fairly customers fairly, obeying laws and doing the right thing for the community 
and throughout the supply chain might already be part of the ESG standards.
As mentioned above ESG reporting standards and regulations are evolving 
fast. The German Code on Due Diligence in Supply Chains and a parallel EU 
legislation are part of a growing global drive to oblige companies to carry out 
human rights and environmental due diligence across their supply chains. If 
required, companies must show they have identified actual or potential risks to 
people and the environment. The evidence must be obtained from suppliers or 
the suppliers’ own suppliers.
As a result, SMEs that fall behind on ESG risk losing valuable opportunities 
with big companies, particularly where regulation or capital depends on it, 
unless they can match the ESG standards of their customers.
SMEs need to be shown the business case for adopting ESG: how it reduces 
risks and can help cement relationships with important clients. This is where 
larger companies with their greater access to technology, know-how, and 
resources, can help.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
58
15. Recommendations
⊲ ESG Strategy
› Define ESG Goals and Objectives
This involves identifying the key ESG issues that are relevant to business and 
setting measurable targets that align with the business strategy. ESG goals and 
targets are essential because they help companies track their progress towards 
sustainability and ethical impact. For example, for a manufacturing company, 
reducing carbon footprint, waste and improving energy efficiency may be key 
ESG goals.
› Assess ESG Risks and Opportunities
Conducting ESG materiality assessment to determine the material risks 
and opportunities associated with business activities, such as the impact of 
operations on the environment, the social impact of your products or services, 
and the governance structure of your business. 
› Integrate ESG into Business Operations
ESG standards should be integrated into the business strategy, rather than 
treated as a separate initiative. This can help ensure that ESG is prioritised and 
integrated into decision-making processes across the organisation.
› Implement ESG Reporting and Monitoring
ESG reporting and monitoring is an important part of any ESG strategy. It 
demonstrates the commitment to sustainability and transparency and identifies 
areas that need improvement. ESG reporting is attracting investors and 
customers who value sustainability and ethical impact.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
59
⊲ Reporting
› Harmonise sustainability reporting and 
company operations in practice
 The goal of reporting is to show progress but sustainability reporting often 
focuses exclusively on the positive elements. As the basic principle is to point 
out key challenges and negative practices, companies should refer to them 
more clearly in their sustainability reports, with an indication of measures and 
approaches they are planning to use.
In that way companies are showing a high level of transparency and 
establishing a basis for dialogue between the wider community and companies.
› Acknowledge and use the principal Report and Explain
Although companies, especially SMEs, cannot report on all aspects of 
sustainability it is beneficial to be guided by the principle of report or explain: if 
certain elements of the sustainability report are not applicable to the company 
in question, this should be clearly explained in the reports.
› Make a clear distinction between CSR and ESG
 Clearly separate the use of the terms CSR and ESG. CSR reporting is often 
confused with ESG reporting and reports are still called reports on socially 
responsible business. Therefore, it is necessary to clearly separate sustainability 
(ESG) reporting from reporting on socially responsible business (CSR) in order 
not to confuse these concepts.
› Specify the methodology used
 If the reporting methodology is not explicitly mentioned it leads to the 
absence of precisely defined criteria and makes monitoring and evaluation 
difficult. It is beneficial that companies identify the methodology they are using 
and use it consistently. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
60
› Interlink sustainability reports with the company’s 
progress towards achieving SDGs 
To make monitoring the achieved results easier in the context of contribution 
the achievement of the SDGs, companies should specifically state the way in 
which they are contributing through their activities and policies. That way it 
would make it possible to clearly link the companies’ sustainable endeavours 
with SDGs.
› Invest in internal ESG teams
Companies’ approach to the issue of sustainability needs to be systematic, 
never ad hoc. This leads to the need to support individuals and teams who would 
permanently deal with sustainability strategies, policy development and practice 
in this area, implementation of standards, as well as sustainability reporting.
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
61
Annex 1: History of global 
environmental and social 
governance: Overview 
of the UN conventions 
and instruments
Addressing human rights and environmental concerns, sustainable 
development, and other related causes have been at the top of the UN’s 
agenda for decades. To help countries achieve these objectives, the UN has 
developed numerous conventions and instruments and invested significant 
effort in providing research and recommendations for their implementation. 
⊲ Conventions concerning environmental issues 
The UN’s effort to address environmental concerns dates back to the 
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm 
in 1972. This was the first major international event regarding ecological 
preservation and enhancement, creating recommendations for joint action 
by the Stockholm Declaration and Plan of Action. Furthermore, the first UN 
programme concerning environmental issues was also designed during the 
conference ― United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Twenty years 
later, the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro represented a historic moment in the 
global sustainability movement. The UN argued that economic development is 
deeply connected to environmental issues in their efforts to get states to take 
meaningful action to stop polluting the planet and depleting its natural resources. 
Following the Summit, three new instruments were adopted to address this goal: 
• The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) offers a basic legal framework and principles for international 
cooperation to combat climate change and to stabilise greenhouse gases.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
62
• The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) encourages conservation, 
sustainability, and the fair and equitable sharing of natural resources. CBD 
covers a wide array of domains directly or indirectly related to biodiversity, 
ranging from science, politics and education to agriculture, business, 
culture and much more.
• The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) is 
the sole legally binding international agreement linking environment and 
development to sustainable land management.
Soon after, the UN began to link environmental concerns with sustainable 
development frameworks in a more tangible way. Nowadays, that 
interconnection is exhibited through the SDG goals, mainly Goal 6 (Clean Water 
and Sanitation), Goal 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy), Goal 11 (Sustainable Cities 
and Communities), Goal 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production), Goal 13 
(Climate Action), Goal 14 (Life Below Water), and Goal 15, (Life on Land).
⊲ Conventions concerning human rights and social issues
The UN has several conventions whose aim is to set international standards 
for the protection and promotion of human rights and that cover a wide array 
of social issues, including discrimination, economic, social, cultural, civil and 
political rights, rights of historically marginalised groups, and whose goal is 
to reduce poverty and inequality, eliminate all forms of violence and improve 
access to healthcare and education. Some of the international human rights 
declarations and treaties that concern business companies are:
• The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is widely considered 
a milestone document in the history of human rights, as it is the first single 
document that comprehensively covers the range of fundamental rights 
and freedoms that belong to all human beings. 
• The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (ICERD) is one of the oldest UN conventions, adopted almost 
60 years ago, whose goal, however, to this day remains important ― combating 
oppression and discrimination. ICERD calls on states to “adopt all necessary 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
63
measures for speedily eliminating racial discrimination in all its forms and 
manifestations, and to prevent and combat racist doctrines and practices to 
promote understanding between races and to build an international community 
free from all forms of racial segregation and racial discrimination”.
• The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR) develops the corresponding rights in the UDHR, with greater 
detail and specific steps required for their full realisation, including the 
right to education, fair and just conditions of work, and an adequate 
standard of living.
• The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) sets 
out principles for respecting the civil and political rights of individuals, 
including freedom from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment, fair trial rights, freedom of thought, religion 
and expression, privacy, home and family life and equality and nondiscrimination.
• The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women (CEDAW) requires states to eliminate discrimination 
against women and girls in all areas of life and ensure they have equal 
access and rights concerning political participation, health, education, 
employment, housing, marriage, family relations, etc.
• The Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) concerns every 
child’s civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, regardless of 
race, religion or abilities. UNCRC encourages states to adopt legislation 
that ensures children get the health care and nutrition they need to survive 
and develop, adopt stronger safeguards to protect them from violence 
and exploitation, and encourage children’s participation in their societies. 
• The International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (CRMW) requires states 
to ensure the protection of the rights and prevention and elimination of the 
exploitation of migrant workers and members of their families throughout 
the entire migration process.
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
64
• The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) 
promotes, protects and ensures the rights of all persons with disabilities 
and promotes respect for their inherent dignity.
⊲ Conventions concerning governance issues 
The UN has several conventions aimed at promoting the rule of law, 
transparency, responsibility, and accountability, and that also respond to 
prominent modern issues concerning governance, such as corruption and 
cybersecurity: 
• United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) concerns the 
prevention, detection, and punishment of corruption, including bribery, 
embezzlement, and money laundering. UNCAC covers five main areas: 
preventive measures, criminalisation and law enforcement, international 
cooperation, asset recovery, and technical assistance and information 
exchange. 
• United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection (UNGCP) provides a 
set of principles to guide states in creating effective consumer protection 
legislation and institutions, promoting international cooperation, and 
sharing experiences in consumer protection.
• United Nations Convention on Cybercrime was the first international 
treaty that addresses crimes committed over the internet and other 
computer networks, including cyber fraud, hacking, and the spread of 
computer viruses. At the moment, this Convention is being renegotiated
in order to develop a new and more inclusive approach to addressing 
cybercrime. 
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
65
List of Acronyms 
• BiH - Bosnia and Herzegovina
• CBD - Convention on Biological Diversity
• CEDAW - Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women
• CEO - Chief Executive Officer
• CSR - Corporate Social Responsibility
• ESG Standards - Environmental, Social and Governance Standards
• ICCPR - International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
• ICERD - International Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
• ICESCR - International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
• IIRC - Integrated Reporting Council
• MDGs - Millennium Development Goals
• NDCs - Nationally Determined Contributions
• SDGs - Sustainable Development Goals
• UNCAC - United Nations Convention against Corruption
• UNDAF - UN Development Assistance Framework 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
66
• UNDP - United Nations Development Programme
• UNEP - United Nations Environment Programme
• UNFCCC - United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
• UNGCP - United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection
• UNFP - UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
• UDHR - Universal Declaration of Human Rights
• UN - United Nations
• UNTOC - United Nations Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime
• USA - United States of America
• USD - United States dollar
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
67
Bibliography: Want 
to learn more? 
Check out our reading list of useful reports, articles and other documents 
that benefit your business.
⊲ BOOKS AND JOURNALS
1. Carney, M. (2021) Value(s): Building a Better World for All. Public Affairs. 
2. Coleman, J.S. (1988) “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital,” The 
American Journal of Sociology, 94, pp. 95–120. Available at: https://doi.
org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/228943. 
3. Daugaard, D. (2020). ‘Emerging new themes in environmental, social and 
governance investing: a systematic literature review’. Accounting and 
Finance, 60, pp. 1501-1530. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/acfi.12479
4. Krishnamoorthy, R. (2021) “Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) 
Investing: Doing Good to Do Well,” Open Journal of Social Sciences, 9, 
pp. 189–197. Available at: https://doi.org/10.4236/jss.2021.97013. 
5. Johnson Jr., C. E., Stout, J. H., and Walter, A. C. “Profound Change: The 
Evolution of ESG” (2020) Business Lawyer, 75(4), pp. 2567–2607. 
6. Ya Ni, A. and Suino, P. (2018) “Corporate Social Responsibility: Doing Well 
and Doing Good,” in M. Van Wart (ed.) Building Business-Government 
Relations. London, UK: Routledge, pp. 175–196. 
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
68
⊲ BLOGS, NEWS ARTICLES AND OTHER 
SECONDARY SOURCES
1. Adecesg (n.d.). What is ESG investing? Available at: https://www.adecesg.
com/resources/faq/what-is-esg-investing/ (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
2. Bao, C. (2023) When It Comes to ESG Investing, There’s No Going Back, 
Nasdaq. Available at: https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/when-it-comesto-esg-investing-theres-no-going-back (Accessed: April 6, 2023). 
3. Boffo, R., and Patalano, R. (2020). ESG Investing: Practices, Progress 
and Challenges. OECD. http://www.oecd.org/finance/ESG-InvestingPractices-Progress-and-Challenges.pdf (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
4. Business and Sustainable Development Commission. (2017). Better 
Business, Better World. Available at: https://unglobalcompact.org/
library/5051 (Accessed: July 26, 2023).
5. Fink, L. Larry Fink’s 2022 Letter to CEOs: The Power of Capitalism, Black 
Rock. Black Rock. Available at: https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/
investor-relations/larry-fink-ceo-letter (Accessed: April 6, 2023). 
6. Henisz, W., Koller, T. and Nuttall, R. (2019) Five ways that ESG creates 
value Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/
Business%20Functions/Strategy%20and%20Corporate%20Finance/
Our%20Insights/Five%20ways%20that%20ESG%20creates%20value/
Five-ways-that-ESG-creates-value.ashx McKinsey Quarterly, November. 
(Accessed: April 6, 2023).
7. Investopedia. (2022, February 10). Environmental, Social, and Governance 
(ESG) Criteria. Available at: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/
environmental-social-and-governance-esg-criteria.asp (Accessed: 
April 9, 2023).
How Environmental, Social and Governance Standards Can Benefit Your Business
69
8. Morningstar. (2020). The History Of Sustainable Investing. Retrieved 
from https://www.morningstar.in/posts/57694/history-sustainableinvesting.aspx (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
9. Principles for Responsible Investment. (n.d.). What are the Principles for 
Responsible Investment? Available at: https://www.unpri.org/pri/whatare-the-principles-for-responsible-investment (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
10. NerdWallet. (2022, March 28). ESG Investing: What It Is and How to Get 
Started. Available at: https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/investing/esginvesting (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
11. OECD. (2020). ESG Investing and Climate Transition: Market Practices, 
Issues and Policy Considerations. OECD. https://www.oecd.org/finance/
ESG-investing-and-climate-transition-market-practices-issues-andpolicy-considerations.pdf (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
12. OECD. (2021). Policy Guidance on Market Practices to Strengthen 
ESG Investing and Finance: A Climate Transition. OECD. https://doi.
org/10.1787/2c5b535c-en (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
13. O’Shea, A. (2021). ESG Investing: What It Is And Why You Might Want 
To Consider It. Forbes Advisor. Available at: https://www.forbes.com/
advisor/investing/esg-investing/ (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
14. Principles for Responsible Investment. (n.d.). What are the Principles for 
Responsible Investment? Available at: https://www.unpri.org/pri/whatare-the-principles-for-responsible-investment (Accessed: April 9, 2023).
15. S&P Global. (2021, August 30). What is the difference between ESG 
investing and socially responsible investing? Available at: https://www.
spglobal.com/en/research-insights/articles/what-is-the-differencebetween-esg-investing-and-socially-responsible-investing (Accessed: 
April 9, 2023).
Building a Sustainable Future: ESG Business Handbook
70


