Innovation is vital for a company’s survival and growth. Firms that don’t innovate fall behind their competitors and ultimately go out of business.
However, traditional forms of innovation may result in profitable products, services, and processes – but also harm employees or over-exploit natural resources.
“Sustainable innovation” seeks to address those unintended social and environmental impacts. It implies that companies can provide products and services that are good for themselves and for society in the long term. This article explains what sustainable innovation means, why it is important, and how to practice it.
The ideas in this article are based on our work at the Innovation Learning Lab at Ivey Business School, where we work with leading corporations and organizations in Canada on pathways to sustainable innovation.

What is Sustainable Innovation?
Sustainable innovation involves making intentional changes to a company’s products, services, or processes to generate long-term social and environmental benefits while creating economic profits for the firm. That definition comes from researcher Richard Adams, who reviewed academic and industry research on the topic.
Here’s how sustainable innovation works with products, services, and processes.
Developing novel products and services. Through sustainable innovation, companies can invent and offer novel products or services that directly contribute to achieving sustainability.

How Sustainable Innovation Differs from Traditional Innovation
Some might wonder how these sustainable innovations differ from traditional forms of innovation. After all, both traditional and sustainability innovation involve developing new products, services, or processes. Three core features set sustainable innovation apart.
Sustainable innovations contribute to sustainable businesses. Sustainable innovation intentionally aims to “meet the needs of present generations without compromising the needs of future generations.” It requires businesses to actively incorporate issues such as human rights, and climate change into their innovation processes. Companies that engage in sustainable innovation go beyond seeking immediate profits. They think long-term, about investing in technologies and people for the future.
Sustainable innovations require systems thinking. When companies engage in sustainable innovation, they do not merely focus on their own organization. Instead, they look more broadly to the whole system of which they are part – including other companies, the natural environment, and stakeholders and communities. They have a good understanding of how their actions affect other organizations and vice versa.
Sustainable innovations must be embedded into firm’s culture. Unlike traditional innovations that are mostly performed within a separate R&D department or unit, sustainable innovations are likely to be more successful when they are deeply embedded in the firm’s culture. When sustainability is not part of the corporate culture, the pursuit of short-term profits will kill sustainability-oriented creative ideas without giving them sufficient time to mature.

Why Innovate Sustainably?
Ultimately, companies succeed when they are sustainable. First, sustainable companies attract talented employees. Compared to their non-sustainable competitors, sustainability-oriented companies bring in better people. In a recent Deloitte survey of millennials and Gen Zs, 49% said that their personal ethics have played a role in their career choices.
Second, companies that consider stakeholders produce more patents and also more impactful patents, according to research by Caroline Flammer and Aleksandra Kacperczyk. In other words, a sustainability orientation leads to more innovation and better innovation. Firms involved in sustainable innovation think more broadly and learn from different perspectives. They get insights and solutions from afar, e.g. from other industries and stakeholders.
Moreover, companies that care about sustainability are also more resilient compared to their competitors: especially important in a turbulent world. Companies with a sustainability orientation were more likely to survive through crises, experienced less share price volatility, and generated more revenues over the long run than those without a sustainability orientation, according to research by Natalia Ortiz-de-Mandojana and Tima Bansal.

How Do We Make Innovation Sustainable?
Despite how wonderful it may sound, sustainable innovation does not come easy. Achieving it takes time, commitment, and effort. So: how can firms innovate sustainably?
Sustainable innovation can be put in three broad categories: operational optimization, organizational transformation, and systems building. Researcher Richard Adams and colleagues identified these different categories, shown in the graphic below. They represent a continuum in terms of impact, with “systems building” creating the greatest change.

Firms can engage in three types of sustainable innovation
Operational optimization. Firms can improve their operational processes without fundamentally changing their business model. They can find ways to “do the same things better,” and reduce their negative environmental and social impacts (e.g., using renewable energy and reducing packaging). This can be done relatively easily by adding environmental and social criteria to existing quality or profit criteria. This approach is sometimes called “eco-efficiency.”
Organizational transformation. For a greater change, companies can create disruptive new products and services that serve societal needs and/or benefit the environment. This step goes beyond “doing less harm” and focuses on “doing good by doing new things.” These companies also see sustainability as a business opportunity. The sustainable innovation examples mentioned above (i.e., biofuel made out of coffee waste, the smartphone with modular design) show how companies can engage in this kind of sustainable innovation. In order to achieve organizational transformation, firms must radically shift their mindset from doing things better to doing new things.
Systems building. The most advanced form of sustainable innovation involves collaborating with others to create positive impacts on people and the planet. Companies here see themselves as part of an ecosystem and recognize that sustainability can’t be achieved by any single organization. They aim to “do good by doing new things with others.” These system builders extend their thinking beyond the boundaries of the organization to include partners in previously unrelated industries as well as marginalized actors.

Each company will want to assess what type of sustainable innovation makes sense for it. Some companies may move through these types sequentially. Others might engage in multiple approaches to innovation. For example, an oil and gas company can seek efficiencies in reducing carbon emissions, while simultaneously investing in innovations in renewable technologies that will take it out of fossil fuels.





There’s no alternative to sustainable development.
Even so, many companies are convinced that the more environment-friendly they become, the more the effort will erode their competitiveness. They believe it will add to costs and will not deliver immediate financial benefits.

Talk long enough to CEOs, particularly in the United States or Europe, and their concerns will pour out: Making our operations sustainable and developing “green” products places us at a disadvantage vis-à-vis rivals in developing countries that don’t face the same pressures. Suppliers can’t provide green inputs or transparency; sustainable manufacturing will demand new equipment and processes; and customers will not pay more for eco-friendly products during a recession. That’s why most executives treat the need to become sustainable as a corporate social responsibility, divorced from business objectives.

Not surprisingly, the fight to save the planet has turned into a pitched battle between governments and companies, between companies and consumer activists, and sometimes between consumer activists and governments. It resembles a three-legged race, in which you move forward with the two untied legs but the tied third leg holds you back. One solution, mooted by policy experts and environmental activists, is more and increasingly tougher regulation. They argue that voluntary action is unlikely to be enough. Another group suggests educating and organizing consumers so that they will force businesses to become sustainable. Although both legislation and education are necessary, they may not be able to solve the problem quickly or completely.

Executives behave as though they have to choose between the largely social benefits of developing sustainable products or processes and the financial costs of doing so. But that’s simply not true. We’ve been studying the sustainability initiatives of 30 large corporations for some time. Our research shows that sustainability is a mother lode of organizational and technological innovations that yield both bottom-line and top-line returns. Becoming environment-friendly lowers costs because companies end up reducing the inputs they use. In addition, the process generates additional revenues from better products or enables companies to create new businesses. In fact, because those are the goals of corporate innovation, we find that smart companies now treat sustainability as innovation’s new frontier.

Indeed, the quest for sustainability is already starting to transform the competitive landscape, which will force companies to change the way they think about products, technologies, processes, and business models. The key to progress, particularly in times of economic crisis, is innovation. Just as some internet companies survived the bust in 2000 to challenge incumbents, so, too, will sustainable corporations emerge from today’s recession to upset the status quo. By treating sustainability as a goal today, early movers will develop competencies that rivals will be hard-pressed to match. That competitive advantage will stand them in good stead, because sustainability will always be an integral part of development.

It isn’t going to be easy. Enterprises that have started the journey, our study shows, go through five distinct stages of change. They face different challenges at each stage and must develop new capabilities to tackle them, as we will show in the following pages. Mapping the road ahead will save companies time—and that could be critical, because the clock is ticking.

Stage 1:
Viewing Compliance as Opportunity
The first steps companies must take on the long march to sustainability usually arise from the law. Compliance is complicated: Environmental regulations vary by country, by state or region, and even by city. (In 2007 San Francisco banned supermarkets from using plastic bags at checkout; San Diego still hasn’t.) In addition to legal standards, enterprises feel pressured to abide by voluntary codes—general ones, such as the Greenhouse Gas Protocol, and sector-specific ones, such as the Forest Stewardship Council code and the Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool—that nongovernmental agencies and industry groups have drawn up over the past two decades. These standards are more stringent than most countries’ laws, particularly when they apply to cross-border trade.
Sustainability Challenges, Competencies, and Opportunities
It’s tempting to adhere to the lowest environmental standards for as long as possible. However, it’s smarter to comply with the most stringent rules, and to do so before they are enforced. This yields substantial first-mover advantages in terms of fostering innovation. For example, automobile manufacturers in the United States take two or three years to develop a new car model. If GM, Ford, or Chrysler had embraced the California Air Resources Board’s fuel consumption and emissions standards when they were first proposed, in 2002, it would be two or three design cycles ahead of its rivals today—and poised to pull further ahead by 2016, when those guidelines will become the basis of U.S. law.

Enterprises that focus on meeting emerging norms gain more time to experiment with materials, technologies, and processes. For instance, in the early 1990s Hewlett-Packard realized that because lead is toxic, governments would one day ban lead solders. Over the following decade it experimented with alternatives, and by 2006 the company had created solders that are an amalgam of tin, silver, and copper, and even developed chemical agents to tackle the problems of oxidization and tarnishing during the soldering process. Thus HP was able to comply with the European Union’s Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive, which regulates the use of lead in electronics products, as soon as it took effect, in July 2006.

Contrary to popular perceptions, conforming to the gold standard globally actually saves companies money. When they comply with the least stringent standards, enterprises must manage component sourcing, production, and logistics separately for each market, because rules differ by country. However, HP, Cisco, and other companies that enforce a single norm at all their manufacturing facilities worldwide benefit from economies of scale and can optimize supply chain operations. The common norm must logically be the toughest.

A Few Simple Rules
Smart corporations follow these simple rules in their effort to become sustainable. Don’t start from the present. If the starting point is the current approach to business, the view of the future is likely to be an ...
Companies can turn antagonistic regulators into allies by leading the way. For instance, HP has helped shape many environmental regulations in Europe, and it uses the resulting brownie points to advantage when necessary. In 2001 the European Union told hardware manufacturers that after January 2006 they could not use hexavalent chromium—which increases the risk of cancer in anyone who comes in contact with it—as an anticorrosion coating. Like its rivals, HP felt that the industry needed more time to develop an alternative. The company was able to persuade regulators to postpone the ban by one year so that it could complete trials on organic and trivalent chromium coatings. This saved it money, and HP used the time to transfer the technology to more than one vendor. The vendors competed to supply the new coatings, which helped reduce HP’s costs.
Companies in the vanguard of compliance naturally spot business opportunities first. In 2002 HP learned that Europe’s Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment regulations would require hardware manufacturers to pay for the cost of recycling products in proportion to their sales. Calculating that the government-sponsored recycling arrangements were going to be expensive, HP teamed up with three electronics makers—Sony, Braun, and Electrolux—to create the private European Recycling Platform. In 2007 the platform, which works with more than 1,000 companies in 30 countries, recycled about 20% of the equipment covered by the WEEE Directive. Partly because of the scale of its operations, the platform’s charges are about 55% lower than those of its rivals. Not only did HP save more than $100 million from 2003 to 2007, but it enhanced its reputation with consumers, policy makers, and the electronics industry by coming up with the idea.

Stage 2:
Making Value Chains Sustainable
Once companies have learned to keep pace with regulation, they become more proactive about environmental issues. Many then focus on reducing the consumption of nonrenewable resources such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas along with renewable resources such as water and timber. The drive to be more efficient extends from manufacturing facilities and offices to the value chain. At this stage, corporations work with suppliers and retailers to develop eco-friendly raw materials and components and reduce waste. The initial aim is usually to create a better image, but most corporations end up reducing costs or creating new businesses as well. That’s particularly helpful in difficult economic times, when corporations are desperate to boost profits.
Companies develop sustainable operations by analyzing each link in the value chain. First they make changes in obvious areas, such as supply chains, and then they move to less obvious suspects, such as returned products.

Supply chains.
Most large corporations induce suppliers to become environment-conscious by offering them incentives. For instance, responding to people’s concerns about the destruction of rain forests and wetlands, multinational corporations such as Cargill and Unilever have invested in technology development and worked with farmers to develop sustainable practices in the cultivation of palm oil, soybeans, cacao, and other agricultural commodities. This has resulted in techniques to improve crop yields and seed production.
Some companies in the West have also started laying down the law. For example, in October 2008 Lee Scott, then Wal-Mart’s CEO, gave more than 1,000 suppliers in China a directive: Reduce waste and emissions; cut packaging costs by 5% by 2013; and increase the energy efficiency of products supplied to Wal-Mart stores by 25% in three years’ time. In like vein, Unilever has declared that by 2015 it will be purchasing palm oil and tea only from sustainable sources, and Staples intends that most of its paper-based products will come from sustainable-yield forests by 2010.
Tools such as enterprise carbon management, carbon and energy footprint analysis, and life-cycle assessment help companies identify the sources of waste in supply chains. Life-cycle assessment is particularly useful: It captures the environment-related inputs and outputs of entire value chains, from raw-materials supply through product use to returns. This has helped companies discover, for instance, that vendors consume as much as 80% of the energy, water, and other resources used by a supply chain, and that they must be a priority in the drive to create sustainable operations.

Operations.
Central to building a sustainable supply chain are operational innovations that lead to greater energy efficiency and reduce companies’ dependence on fossil fuels. Take the case of FedEx, which deploys a fleet of 700 aircraft and 44,000 motorized vehicles that consume 4 million gallons of fuel a day. Despite the global slowdown, the company is replacing old aircraft with Boeing 757s as part of its Fuel Sense program, although it will postpone ordering new ones until 2010. This will reduce the company’s fuel consumption by 36% while increasing capacity by 20%. It is also introducing Boeing 777s, which will reduce fuel consumption by a further 18%. FedEx has developed a set of 30 software programs that help optimize aircraft schedules, flight routes, the amount of extra fuel on board, and so on. The company has set up 1.5-megawatt solar-energy systems at its distribution hubs in California and Cologne, Germany. It uses hybrid vans that are 42% more fuel efficient than conventional trucks and has replaced more than 25% of its fleet with smaller, more fuel-efficient vehicles. Following some other pioneers, FedEx recently turned its energy-saving expertise into a stand-alone consulting business that, it hopes, will become a profit center.

Workplaces.
Partly because of environmental concerns, some corporations encourage employees to work from home. This leads to reductions in travel time, travel costs, and energy use. One-tenth of the corporations in our sample had from 21% to 50% of their employees telecommuting regularly. Of IBM’s 320,000 employees, 25% telecommute, which leads to an annual savings of $700 million in real estate costs alone. AT&T estimates that it saves $550 million annually as a result of telecommuting. Productivity rises by 10% to 20%, and job satisfaction also increases when people telecommute up to three days a week. For example, at the health-care services provider McKesson, the group that reported the highest job satisfaction in 2007 consisted of 1,000 nurses who worked from home.

Returns.
Concerns about cutting waste invariably spark companies’ interest in product returns. In the United States, returns reduce corporate profitability by an average of about 4% a year. Instead of scrapping returned products, companies at this stage try to recapture some of the lost value by reusing them. Not only can this turn a cost center into a profitable business, but the change in attitude signals that the company is more concerned about preventing environmental damage and reducing waste than it is about cannibalizing sales.

Cisco, for example, had traditionally regarded the used equipment it received as scrap and recycled it at a cost of about $8 million a year. Four years ago it tried to find uses for the equipment, mainly because 80% of the returns were in working condition. A value-recovery team at Cisco identified internal customers that included its customer service organization, which supports warranty claims and service contracts, and the labs that provide technical support, training, and product demonstrations. In 2005 Cisco designated the recycling group as a business unit, set clear objectives for it, and drew up a notional P&L account. As a result, the reuse of equipment rose from 5% in 2004 to 45% in 2008, and Cisco’s recycling costs fell by 40%. The unit has become a profit center that contributed $100 million to Cisco’s bottom line in 2008.

When they create environment-friendly value chains, companies uncover the monetary benefits that energy efficiency and waste reduction can deliver. They also learn to build mechanisms that link sustainability initiatives to business results, as the Cisco example shows. As a result, environmental concerns take root within business units, allowing executives to tackle the next big challenge.

Stage 3:
Designing Sustainable Products and Services
At this stage executives start waking up to the fact that a sizable number of consumers prefer eco-friendly offerings, and that their businesses can score over rivals by being the first to redesign existing products or develop new ones. In order to identify product innovation priorities, enterprises have to use competencies and tools they acquired at earlier stages of their evolution.
Companies are often startled to discover which products are unfriendly to the environment. When Procter & Gamble, for example, conducted life-cycle assessments to calculate the amount of energy needed to use its products, it found that detergents can make U.S. households energy guzzlers. They spend 3% of their annual electricity budgets to heat water for washing clothes. If they switched to cold-water washing, P&G reckoned, they would consume 80 billion fewer kilowatt-hours of electricity and emit 34 million fewer tons of carbon dioxide. That’s why the company made the development of cold-water detergents a priority. In 2005 P&G launched Tide Coldwater in the United States and Ariel Cool Clean in Europe. The trend has caught on more in Europe than in the United States. By 2008, 21% of British households were washing in cold water, up from 2% in 2002; in Holland the number shot up from 5% to 52% of households. During the current recession P&G has continued to promote cold-water products, emphasizing their lower energy costs and compact packaging. If cold-water washing catches on worldwide, P&G will be able to cash in on the trend.

Companies are often startled to discover which products are unfriendly to the environment.
Likewise, Clorox was surprised to learn that household cleaning products are the second biggest environmental concern—after automobiles—in the United States. Its market research also showed that 15% of consumers treat health and sustainability as major criteria when making purchase decisions, and 25% to 35% take environmental benefits into consideration.
In 2008 Clorox became the first mainstream consumer products company to launch a line of nonsynthetic cleaning products. It spent three years and more than $20 million to develop the Green Works line, delaying the launch twice to ensure that all five original products performed as well as or better than conventional options in blind tests.
Clorox had to tackle several marketing issues before launching Green Works. It decided to charge a 15% to 25% premium over conventional cleaners to reflect the higher costs of raw materials. Green Works products are still cheaper than competing products, which carry a 25% to 50% markup over synthetic ones. After much discussion, the marketing team chose to put the Clorox logo on the Green Works line to signal that it performs as well as conventional Clorox products. The company persuaded the Sierra Club—a leading environmental group in the United States—to endorse Green Works. Although it sparked controversy among activists, this partnership strengthened Clorox’s credentials, and in 2008 the company paid nearly $500,000 to the Sierra Club as its share of revenues from the line. Finally, Clorox struck special arrangements with retail chains such as Wal-Mart and Safeway to ensure that consumers could easily find Green Works products on shelves.
By the end of 2008 Green Works had grown the U.S. natural cleaners market by 100%, and Clorox enjoyed a 40% share of the $200 million market. Green Works sales weakened in the fourth quarter of 2008 because of the recession, but they rebounded in the first quarter of 2009. The tailwind has encouraged Clorox to launch more sustainable products: In January 2009 it introduced biodegradable cleaning wipes, and the following June it introduced nonsynthetic detergents, where it will run into rival P&G.
To design sustainable products, companies have to understand consumer concerns and carefully examine product life cycles. They must learn to combine marketing skills with their expertise in scaling up raw-materials supplies and distribution. As they move into markets that lie beyond their traditional expertise, they have to team up with nongovernmental organizations. Smart companies like P&G and Clorox, which have continued to invest in eco-friendly products despite the recession, look beyond the public-relations benefits to hone competencies that will enable them to dominate markets tomorrow.

Stage 4:
Developing New Business Models
Most executives assume that creating a sustainable business model entails simply rethinking the customer value proposition and figuring out how to deliver a new one. However, successful models include novel ways of capturing revenues and delivering services in tandem with other companies. In 2008 FedEx came up with a novel business model by integrating the Kinko’s chain of print shops that it had acquired in 2004 with its document-delivery business. Instead of shipping copies of a document from, say, Seattle to New York, FedEx now asks customers if they would like to electronically transfer the master copy to one of its offices in New York. It prints and binds the document at an outlet there and can deliver copies anywhere in the city the next morning. The customer gets more time to prepare the material, gains access to better-quality printing, and can choose from a wide range of document formats that Fed-Ex provides. The document travels most of the way electronically and only the last few miles in a truck. FedEx’s costs shrink and its services become extremely eco-friendly.
Some companies have developed new models just by asking at different times what their business should be. That’s what Waste Management, the $14 billion market leader in garbage disposal, did. Two years ago it estimated that some $9 billion worth of reusable materials might be found in the waste it carried to landfills each year. At about the same time, its customers, too, began to realize that they were throwing away money. Waste Management set up a unit, Green Squad, to generate value from waste. For instance, Green Squad has partnered with Sony in the United States to collect electronic waste that used to end up in landfills. Instead of being just a waste-trucking company, Waste Management is showing customers both how to recover value from waste and how to reduce waste.
New technologies provide start-ups with the ability to challenge conventional wisdom. Calera, a California start-up, has developed technology to extract carbon dioxide from industrial emissions and bubble it through seawater to manufacture cement. The process mimics that used by coral, which builds shells and reefs from the calcium and magnesium in seawater. If successful, Calera’s technology will solve two problems: Removing emissions from power plants and other polluting enterprises, and minimizing emissions during cement production. The company’s first cement plant is located in the Monterey Bay area, near the Moss Landing power plant, which emits 3.5 million tons of carbon dioxide annually. The key question is whether Calera’s cement will be strong enough when produced in large quantities to rival conventional Portland cement. The company is toying with a radical business model: It will give away cement to customers while charging polluters a fee for removing their emissions. Calera’s future is hard to predict, but its technology may well upend an established industry and create a cleaner world.
Developing a new business model requires exploring alternatives to current ways of doing business as well as understanding how companies can meet customers’ needs differently. Executives must learn to question existing models and to act entrepreneurially to develop new delivery mechanisms. As companies become more adept at this, the experience will lead them to the final stage of sustainable innovation, where the impact of a new product or process extends beyond a single market.

Stage 5:
Creating Next-Practice Platforms
Next practices change existing paradigms. To develop innovations that lead to next practices, executives must question the implicit assumptions behind current practices. This is exactly what led to today’s industrial and services economy. Somebody once asked: Can we create a carriage that moves without horses pulling it? Can we fly like birds? Can we dive like whales? By questioning the status quo, people and companies have changed it. In like vein, we must ask questions about scarce resources: Can we develop waterless detergents? Can we breed rice that grows without water? Can biodegradable packaging help seed the earth with plants and trees?
Sustainability can lead to interesting next-practice platforms. One is emerging at the intersection of the internet and energy management. Called the smart grid, it uses digital technology to manage power generation, transmission, and distribution from all types of sources along with consumer demand. The smart grid will lead to lower costs as well as the more efficient use of energy. The concept has been around for years, but the huge investments going into it today will soon make it a reality. The grid will allow companies to optimize the energy use of computers, network devices, machinery, telephones, and building equipment, through meters, sensors, and applications. It will also enable the development of cross-industry platforms to manage the energy needs of cities, companies, buildings, and households. Technology vendors such as Cisco, HP, Dell, and IBM are already investing to develop these platforms, as are utilities like Duke Energy, SoCal Edison, and Florida Power & Light.
Two enterprisewide initiatives help companies become sustainable. One: When a company’s top management team decides to focus on the problem, change happens quickly. For instance, in 2005 General Electric’s CEO, Jeff Immelt, declared that the company would focus on tackling environmental issues. Since then every GE business has tried to move up the sustainability ladder, which has helped the conglomerate take the lead in several industries. Two: Recruiting and retaining the right kind of people is important. Recent research suggests that three-fourths of workforce entrants in the United States regard social responsibility and environmental commitment as important criteria in selecting employers. People who are happy about their employers’ positions on those issues also enjoy working for them. Thus companies that try to become sustainable may well find it easier to hire and retain talent.
Leadership and talent are critical for developing a low-carbon economy. The current economic system has placed enormous pressure on the planet while catering to the needs of only about a quarter of the people on it, but over the next decade twice that number will become consumers and producers. Traditional approaches to business will collapse, and companies will have to develop innovative solutions. That will happen only when executives recognize a simple truth: Sustainability = Innovation.







The synergy between innovation and sustainability is shaping our future. At the heart of this intersection lies the pursuit of groundbreaking ideas that drive progress and ensure our planet’s long-term well-being.

Surveys show that younger generations prefer sustainable and socially conscious brands. And they’re willing to back it up with their wallets — Gen Z will pay up to 10% more for sustainable products. A Nielson study shows that 75% of Millennials change their buying habits in favor of environmentally-friendly products. According to a Pew study, addressing climate change is at the forefront — a topic that begins and ends with managing fossil fuel consumption.

With the youngest generation accounting for 20% of our global population, savvy businesses are bridging the gap between innovation and sustainability. That’s exactly what many car manufacturers, including semi-truck manufacturer Quantron AG, are doing.

Michael Perschke, CEO and Member of The Board of Quantron AG, is disrupting the transportation industry with sustainable solutions for short- and long-haul trucking and buses. The Quantron truck series uses hydrogen-powered fuel cell solutions to decarbonize the transportation sector, which Perschke finds fundamental to achieving climate goals.

Perschke developed strategic partnerships to bring Quantron-as-a-Service (QaaS) to the industry. The future of QaaS is to provide a comprehensive zero-emissions transportation solution … on a per-kilometer basis.

There are many lessons to learn from Perschke’s business model. Here are five ideas he shared that span all industries:

1. Adopt visionary thinking.
CEO: C-suite news, analysis, and advice for top decision makers right to your inbox.
Always look ahead and envision the future of your industry. By anticipating the needs and challenges of tomorrow, you can position your company to be a leader. This proactive approach sets the direction for your business and inspires your team and stakeholders to rally behind a shared vision.
The challenge is managing rapid growth without compromising stability. According to experts, there are three perspectives to adopting visionary leadership:
Diagnostic perspective. Visionaries who adopt this perspective take a practical and analytical approach to thinking. They evaluate what’s worked and what hasn’t. These leaders establish a starting point that identifies obstacles, procedures, and personalities that can create blind spots. Visionaries adopting a diagnostic perspective incorporate these potential shortcomings into the overall vision.
Innovation perspective. Often, true innovation is “hiding in plain sight.” It just takes someone — or a team of someones — to bring it into focus. Visionary leaders create the fabric to bring these opportunities to life.
Unseen perspective. This perspective challenges the status quo by forging new, unseen territory. Visionary leaders adopting this perspective are pioneers in their field — they genuinely believe “it” will work.

2. Embrace innovation.
Stay ahead of the curve by continuously innovating and adapting. In an ever-evolving landscape, those who remain static risk obsolescence. By fostering a culture of innovation, you ensure that your company remains relevant, competitive, and ready to seize new opportunities that arise.
Research shows that 84% of executives believe innovation drives their success. Although 95% of product innovations fail, 84% of consumers still make purchasing decisions based on forward-thinking innovation company leadership.
Perschke embraces innovation. His company forged a holistic approach to transportation encompassing green hydrogen molecules, dispensing infrastructure, fleet management, and maintenance. He aims to “provide sustainable transportation solutions to meet the global surge in demand for zero-emission trucks.”

3. Forge strong partnerships.
Collaborations can amplify your reach and capabilities. Strategic partnerships allow you to pool resources, share expertise, and tackle more significant challenges. These partnerships often lead to synergistic outcomes, where the combined efforts produce results greater than the sum of individual contributions.
The founders of Quantron AG include a diverse group of passionate engineers and environmental advocates with a singular goal: creating vehicles to meet the demands of modern transportation while paving the way for a cleaner future. Quantron AG is a testament to what businesses can achieve when vision, innovation, and determination converge.
Penschke stresses that businesses should foster collaborations during the initial start-up stages to accelerate growth. He believes in the power of collective expertise and resources.

4. Stay agile.
Agility is critical to address challenges head-on. Maintain flexibility in your strategies, processes, and decision-making. An agile approach allows you to pivot when necessary, respond swiftly to market shifts, and capitalize on emergent opportunities.
Agility is governed by its culture, leadership, and governance — each influences the other and how the company evolves in response to the changing needs of customers and stakeholders. Studies show agile organizations improve revenue 37% faster and realize 30% higher profits than non-agile companies.
Many organizations are becoming more agile by simplifying and shifting their focus. Three strategies to implement include:
Create an agile mindset. Often, fear is the biggest barrier to agility. An agile mindset involves flexibility, collaboration, and learning. An agile mindset helps teams adapt to change, not struggle with it. It requires trust that team members will do what is in the consumer's best interest.
Simplify processes. Complexity can be a hurdle to responding to quickly changing economic conditions. Automate and simplify repetitive company processes. Use technology designed for your industry.
Maintain open communication. Improve communication between departments using tools such as Slack or Trello. Employ standing meetings or daily team huddles to promote a free exchange of ideas among your team in a less formal setting. Organizations spend 15% of their time in meetings, and most surveys show those are 71% unproductive. A Washington University study showed that teams participating in standing meetings shared ideas more fluidly and improved work product.

5. Commit to sustainability.
In business and operations, prioritize sustainability for long-term success. Beyond the environmental benefits, a sustainable approach can lead to cost savings, enhanced brand reputation, and increased customer loyalty. Integrating sustainability into your core values ensures your company's growth is responsible and resilient.
Perschke says that “public perception and awareness play a pivotal role.” He aims to transform the heavy-duty trucking industry — forging a greener path by setting new benchmarks in hydrogen mobility. Quantron AG is committed to providing comprehensive solutions to the challenges facing clean energy.
Business leaders should focus on their lane — for Quantron AG, that’s transportation. Sustainability starts with your industry. The principles encompass environmental, social, and economic sustainability. While business may lean in one direction or another, ultimately, a commitment to sustainability is a commitment to all three.
The profound impact on consumer preferences and the pioneering efforts of companies like Quantron AG continue to shape our economy. And while significant improvements have been made in recent years, there’s still room for improvement.
Sustainability is a global concern that can only be achieved through collaboration where organizations each do their part.

CONTENTS
LEADING INNOVATION
Chapter 5: Sustainable Innovation
Chapter 5 Learning Outcomes
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:

Define sustainable innovation.
Discuss the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
List three differences between sustainable innovation and traditional innovation.
Discuss how companies can facilitate change through sustainable innovation design.
Definition of Sustainable Innovation
What is meant by sustainable innovation? Sustainability is the capacity to endure in a relatively ongoing way.  Sustainable innovation means that companies seek out ways in which to sustain continuous innovation/improvement for company growth, competitive advantage, increased market share, etc. The right company structure can help make innovation a sustainable practice. Organizations cannot afford to put resources (time, people, money) into innovating only to have these innovations fail.  Companies structure for innovation to help sustain, or maintain, ongoing innovation in an effort to stay competitive in their markets. Allocating resources appropriately, ensuring feasibility, and reporting a return on investment are important steps in creating a sustainable innovative business environment.

The term sustainability is also used to refer to environmental sustainability.  Environmental sustainability focuses on acting in a way that ensures future generations have the natural resources available to live an equal, if not better, way of life as current generations. Many innovations today are focused on solving environmental issues. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the United Nations are broad and ambitious, calling on all countries – be they upper, middle, or low income – to make tangible improvements to the lives of their citizens. The ‌goals (shown below) ‌encompass social, environmental, and economic aspects.

United Nations Sustainable Goals. 17 Goals listed regarding water, land, climate, people (hunger, equity, peace, etc.)
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
Our world has grown increasingly complex, and it’s no longer enough for individual organizations, companies, or even governments to apply superficial fixes of their own making to chronic problems. Solutions that are not inclusive or do not consider root causes are by definition short-sighted. Short-sighted solutions may not continue to work over time. Societal issues like poverty, social inequality, racial injustice, and food insecurity, to name a few, require a new kind of collaboration between the business, the nonprofit, and the government sectors.[1]

The world is facing a number of environmental, economic, and social challenges. Our future depends on sustainable solutions that improve our lives, without adversely affecting our neighbors or our ecosystems.
Consumers today care about the world they live in and the people of the earth and businesses need to care as well. The term, Triple Bottom Line is often used to refer to the concept that businesses need to not only be concerned with making a profit but also be concerned about the manner in which they do so.  The three parts of the Triple Bottom Line include considering the impact that business operations and innovation have on societal, environmental, and financial well-being; in other words, people, planet, and profit (respectively).  Consumers put pressure on companies to do good; good for their customers, communities, and investors; good for the planet by reducing pollution or innovating to support the environment and communities; and after doing these things, consumers feel that it is then acceptable for the company to make a profit.  Some business leaders think this is a terrible idea often because operating a business with sustainability in mind usually increases costs.  With that said, many consumers are willing to pay a little more for pet-friendly, environment-friendly, and people-friendly products and services. You may have noticed that many innovations that are good for the environment are also good for people and therefore are supported by the people and will generate a profit for the business in the long run.

Sustainable Innovation Collaboration
The Ivey Innovation Learning Lab is a new approach to learning that builds unique insights from leading academic thinking and peer-to-peer dialogue with fellow leaders. Participants come from business, government, and academia. The Lab consortium knows that the way in which people live and work is being profoundly disrupted. The knowledge and tools of the past will not necessarily help navigate the future, nor solve the urgent and complex challenges facing society and business.

Watch the “Shaping the Future of Innovation”, Ivey Business School YouTube video below to learn about the Ivey Centre for Building Sustainable innovations.[2] Transcript for “Shaping the Future of Innovation” Video [PDF–New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.



Difference Between Sustainable Innovation and Traditional Innovation
Both traditional and sustainable innovation involves developing new products, services, or processes. Three core features set sustainable innovation apart.

Sustainable Business. Sustainable innovation intentionally aims to “meet the needs of present generations without compromising the needs of future generations.” It requires businesses to actively incorporate issues such as those defined by the United Nations Sustainability Goals. Companies that engage in sustainable innovation think long-term, about aligning with consumer demands for fair working conditions, environmentally friendly processes and products, improvements in communities, etc. These companies understand that consumers evaluate how ethical and sustainable an organization is, and base their decisions on whether or not to support a business on these evaluations.[3]
Corporate Culture. Unlike traditional innovations that are mostly performed within a separate R&D department or unit, sustainable innovations are likely to be more successful when they are deeply embedded in the firm’s culture. When sustainability is not part of the corporate culture, the pursuit of short-term profits will kill sustainability-oriented creative ideas without giving them sufficient time to mature. Sustainable innovation is disruptive because it can result in better business models, improved processes, streamlined resource flows, reduced waste and cost, and create new market segments entirely, making it harder for corporations to defend the status quo.[4]
Systems Thinking. Sustainable innovation is more collaborative because it is a cross-discipline concept. Companies must reach out across industries to unlock the value of sustainable innovations. It changes the corporate “value chain” to more of a “value web.” Companies consider how their innovations affect various stakeholders, the environment, and society.[5]
Facilitating Change Through Sustainable Innovation Design
Approaches to Sustainability
The Institute for Manufacturing at the University of Cambridge crafted a chart of increasingly complex approaches to sustainability for designers.[6]

Green Design. Green design is the most basic level as it describes design efforts that optimize individual aspects of product design, for example, replacing virgin plastics with recycled plastics.
Eco-Design. The next level is eco-design because it goes beyond single materials and focuses on the life cycle of the entire product. For example, selecting low-impact material choices, optimized manufacturing, efficient distribution, and optimized product lifetime.
Sustainable Product Design. This approach added aspects of social fairness to the design equation, so it is only at this point that design can be considered to address the triple bottom line.
Design for Sustainability. This is the point where design no longer focuses only on design for products but rather a systemic lens is being applied. Design for sustainability includes four domains: design for symbolic and visual communications, design for material objects, design of activities and organized services, and design for complex systems or environments for living, working, playing, and learning. Issues of democracy and justice are also incorporated into this lens.
Transformative Design. Includes all of the above and adds the design of entirely new ways of thinking about the human experience in the future. This is often achieved through creating solutions that highlight future ways of living.
Examples of Sustainable Innovations
Eco-friendly Biofuel. Through sustainable innovation, companies can invent and offer novel products or services that directly contribute to achieving sustainability. For example, Bio-bean, a British startup, developed an eco-friendly biofuel made from coffee waste to help power London’s double-decker buses. Bio-bean also upcycles spent coffee grounds into eco-friendly products such as coffee logs and coffee pellets—alternatives to carbon-heavy fuels such as coal briquettes and imported wood logs. Bio-bean is using material previously considered waste, contributing to a circular economy while generating approximately $10 million (USD) in annual revenue in 2020.[7]

Fairly-sourced Smartphones. Sustainable innovation is not only about inventing novel products or services. Firms can also innovate sustainably while offering existing products or services when they change their processes. Process changes can occur in many areas, e.g. design, production, marketing, and even HR. For example, Fairphone, a Dutch social enterprise, offers consumers fairly-sourced smartphones. Unlike bio-bean, which created novel products (i.e., logs and pellets made out of coffee waste), Fairphone products do not have any new technical features. Instead, Fairphone dramatically changed the smartphone production process to make it more responsible and sustainable. They use recycled and responsibly mined materials and provide their workers with fair wages and good labor conditions. Because approximately 80% of the emissions of a smartphone come from its production, Fairphone designs its phones to last. They have a modular design which makes repairs and upgrades easier, thereby significantly reducing e-waste.[8]

Smog Vacuum Cleaner. Daan Roosegaarde is the mastermind behind the world’s first smog vacuum cleaner. The Smog Free Tower measures almost 23 feet high (7 meters) and sucks in polluted air, cleaning it through a process of ionization before releasing it again. At its peak performance, the tower cleans 30,000 m3 of air per hour.  Thanks to Roosegaarde’s design, you can even wear rings made from the compressed smog particles collected from the tower. By buying and wearing a Smog Free Ring, you’re contributing to over 10,700 square feet (1000 square meters) of clean air. The project has garnered a lot of attention since its inception, winning multiple awards. Recent tower campaigns have been launched in South Korea, China, the Netherlands, Mexico, and Poland.[9]

Solar Glass. Solar glass could change the way we create homes and commercial buildings. Researchers at the University of Michigan are developing solar glass, a sustainable engineering project that has generated a lot of buzz in recent years. Just as the name implies, solar glass would be able to capture and store solar energy. According to the research team, 5 to 7 billion square meters of usable window space exists, enough to power a full 40% of US energy needs using solar glass.[10]

Edible spoons with little desserts on each
Edible spoons
Edible Cutlery. A green alternative to plastic cutlery, Bakey’s edible alternative comes in three different flavors—plain, savory, and sweet. They’re 100% natural and will biodegrade if not consumed.[11]

Water Capture. Some innovations are the result of using nature as a design mentor (biomimicry), for example, recent advancements in fog catchers or netting systems in arid climates help communities capture water from the morning fog and were modeled on an understanding of how the texture on the Namibian Desert Beetle’s forewings captures moisture so efficiently. The Biomimicry Institute provides learning journals that can help designers create a strong foundation for further learning. They have also created an amazing website called “Ask Nature”.[12]

Green Buildings. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design or LEED® is an international symbol of sustainability excellence and green building leadership. LEED’s proven and holistic approach helps virtually all building types lower carbon emissions, conserve resources, and reduce operating costs by prioritizing sustainable practices. Canada is one of the top territories in the world for LEED certification. Did you know that buildings generate nearly 30% of all greenhouse gases, and 35% of landfill waste, while consuming up to 70% of municipal water?[13]

Sustainable design continues to evolve with new technology and understanding. Architects and designers are thinking into the future and creating buildings based on a broader concept of sustainability; one that embraces more than improved energy performance. With building design having a profound impact on the environment, its occupants, and the economy, architects and designers have a unique ability to impart real positive change.[14]

Sustainability and innovation go hand in hand. One thing that the green building movement is achieving is that it’s challenging our community, architects, engineers, building owners, lenders, appraisers, and others, to think differently from their predecessors, or even from themselves. In less than a decade, the green building movement changed the entire building industry and manufacturing industry for construction products and equipment. With the increased demand for green and healthy materials, efficient equipment, and fixtures, green buildings became cost-effective and achievable.[15]

Circular Economy
Modern society has become very good at creating linear systems of production, the take-make-waste process. In these systems, we extract raw materials and put them through a process of manufacturing that includes intensive material and energy input as well as a lot of transportation from one manufacturing plant to another. This is considered the upstream phase because it occurs on the way to the user. Consumers then use the products until they become obsolete which can mean everything from being no longer in style to breaking, to requiring replacement upgrades. Much of this obsolescence is actually built into the design in order to generate profits for companies, but this is a narrow way of thinking about long-term business success. Finally, once a user is done with a product, they discard it. This end-of-life phase is considered the downstream phase. This linear system results in significant damage to the natural systems that support us.  So, design for sustainability involves transforming linear thinking into cyclical thinking. In nature, there is no such thing as waste. Cyclical thinking is not merely recycling. It’s designing products to be easily disassembled in combination with designing new take-back systems and infrastructure that make it easier and less expensive for companies to collect the materials they will use in one generation of products in order to manufacture the next generation of products. This regenerative approach to design has taken many forms over the last several decades as we move towards establishing a circular economy.[16]

The circular economy is based on the principles of designing out waste and pollution, keeping products and materials in use, and regenerating natural systems. There is a lot of waste in our current system. According to the World Resources Institute, over 100 billion tons of resources flow every year and 60% end up as waste or greenhouse emissions. Similarly, we waste approximately a third of all food produced. The circular economy offers a system where waste and pollution are reduced through product design. Importantly, 80% of environmental impacts are determined during the design stage. With a change in mindset, waste becomes a design flaw instead of being an inherent byproduct of everyday consumption.[17]

The overexploitation of natural resources required to achieve economic growth and development has negatively impacted the environment and adversely affected their availability and cost. So, it is easy to see why the idea of a circular economy, which offers new ways to create a more sustainable economic growth model, is taking hold across the globe.[18]

Watch the “Creating a Circular Economy for Fashion”, YouTube video below to learn about the innovations in the fashion industry that may just help save our world.[19] Transcript for “Creating a Circular Economy for Fashion” Video [PDF–New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.



 

Key Takeaways
Sustainable innovation means that companies seek out ways in which to sustain continuous innovation/improvement for company growth, competitive advantage, increased market share, etc.
Sustainability is the capacity to endure in a relatively ongoing way.  The term sustainability is also used to refer to environmental sustainability.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the United Nations are broad and ambitious, calling on all countries – be they upper, middle, or low income – to make tangible improvements to the lives of their citizens. The ‌goals ‌encompass social, environmental, and economic aspects.
The Ivey Innovation Learning Lab is a new approach to learning that builds unique insights from leading academic thinking and peer-to-peer dialogue with fellow leaders. Participants come from business, government, and academia. The Lab consortium knows that the way in which people live and work is being profoundly disrupted. The knowledge and tools of the past will not necessarily help navigate the future, nor solve the urgent and complex challenges facing society and business.
Both traditional and sustainable innovation involves developing new products, services, or processes. Three core features set sustainable innovation apart–sustainable business, corporate culture, and systems thinking.
The Institute for Manufacturing at the University of Cambridge crafted a chart of increasingly complex approaches to sustainability for designers: Green Design, Eco-Design, Sustainable Product Design, Design for Sustainability, and Transformative Design.
Modern society has become very good at creating linear systems of production, the take-make-waste process. This linear system results in significant damage to the natural systems that support us.  So, design for sustainability involves transforming linear thinking into cyclical thinking. The regenerative approach to cyclical design has taken many forms over the last several decades as we move towards establishing a circular economy.
The circular economy is based on the principles of designing out waste and pollution, keeping products and materials in use, and regenerating natural systems. There is a lot of waste in our current system.
End-of-Chapter Exercises
Environmental Sustainability. Search the Internet and see if you can find at least one exciting and recent “environmentally sustainable” innovation that aligns with one or more of the United Nations Sustainability Goals.  Share your findings with your professor and/or class.
Social Sustainability. Search the Internet and see if you can find at least one exciting and recent “socially sustainable” innovation that aligns with one or more of the United Nations Sustainability Goals.  Share your findings with your professor and/or class.
Carbon Footprint. Search the Internet to learn more about “carbon footprint”.  With a partner discuss ways in which you currently are reducing your carbon footprint. For example, do you remember to turn out the lights when you leave the house? Identify additional ways in which you can further reduce your carbon footprint.  On a larger scale how might companies or countries begin to reduce their carbon footprint?  Why is it important for individuals as well as businesses to reduce their carbon footprints? Share your thoughts and findings with your professor and/or class.
Innovation Lab. Search the Internet to find one company that has developed an Innovation Lab of its own.  What is the company currently innovating? Does this company consider “design for sustainability” or “transformative design” approaches when innovating?  Explain by sharing your findings with your professor and/or class.
Debate Global Warming. Search the Internet to learn about the causes of global warming and its ramifications. Do you believe it’s really happening?  Why or why not? What might happen in 50, 100, or 200 years if nothing changes?  You may not be around in 100 years but your grandchildren might be. Debate with the class whether or not global warming is real and what should be done about it, if anything!
Water Shortages. It’s been said that by 2025, two-thirds of the world’s population may face water shortages. Search the Internet to learn more about this problem. What is being done to help? Discuss with a partner, class, or professor.
Clean Water. In some areas of the world, people do not have clean drinking water. Search the Internet to learn more about this problem. What is being done to help? Discuss with a partner, class, or professor.
Canadian Government Sustainability Goals. Visit the website Explore 17 Goals and review how the Canadian Government is supporting these goals.  Select two goals you feel are most important or that affect you personally. What is the government doing to reach these goals?  Is it enough? Discuss your thoughts with a partner, class, or professor.
The World’s Most Sustainable Countries. Review the rankings of the world’s most sustainable countries at The World’s Most Sustainable Countries – WorldAtlas.  Does anything surprise you?  Why are the top three countries at the top?  Do you think all countries could work toward getting to the top of the list? Why or why not? Discuss with a partner, class, or professor.
Biomimicry. Search the Internet to find an innovation that was designed with nature as a mentor.  The innovation should mimic something in nature.  Share your findings with your partner, class, or professor.

INNOVATION FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Vittoria Tuzzi, Mathilde Chambost, Ines Goncalves | Fraser Dryburgh, 
Ayse Koçak, Aira Paliukenaite, Bansi Popat | Elena Schmider, Max 
Jochem, Tim Haresma, Steff Nagel | Sarah El-Boujdaini, Pamela 
Navarrete, Richard Herts, Luciana Paredes | Christian Nota, Marie 
Gillet, Hamza Sayan | Ana López, Anna Muizniece, Agustina Pérez |
Inês Ruas, Anastasia Velonaki, Alena Pridiri
2
Copyright © Authors, 2020
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission in writing, from the authors. The opinions expressed here are the author’s 
own; they do not necessarily reflect the views of any institutions. Part of Assignments-As-Products (APP) 
and Digitally Enhanced Eligible Products (DEEP) approach of Governance of Innovation (GID 4408) 
course for educational and outreach purposes. 
3
Editorial Note
The first run of Innovation for Sustainability class at Maastricht Graduate School of Governance is over. The 
course is the final course of Governance of Innovation specialisation track of Master of Science in Public 
Policy and Human Development programme at Maastricht Graduate School of Governance and UNUMERIT. We met bright minds joining the class of May-June 2020. It was an intensive learning period for 
them, and for us it is always interesting to listen, and finally, read about the sustainability issues and 
solution approaches that the participants want to see a positive value in. We think that this first volume of 
open access digital compilation of “Innovation for Sustainability” e-book will inform and inspire many 
people around the globe, as well as the next cohort, about the need for innovation for sustainability 
Have a good read!
Prof. Dr. René Kemp and Dr. Serdar Türkeli
Maastricht, the Netherlands
June, 2020
4
Contents
1. Amsterdam Circular City: Case Study Overview, by Vittoria Tuzzi, Mathilde Chambost, Ines 
Goncalves........................................................................................................................................5
2. Aquaponics Farming System: Addressing Urban Food Security and Sustainability in 
Singapore, by Fraser Dryburgh, Ayse Koçak, Aira Paliukenaite, Bansi Popat ................................17
3. Bicycle-centered Cities: An analysis on Copenhagen and Utrecht’s Bicycle Policy, by Elena 
Schmider, Max Jochem, Tim Haresma, Steff Nagel .........................................................................29
4. Brave New Volt: Sustainable Energy Transition analysis of German Solar Power Energy 
Sector, by Sarah El-Boujdaini, Pamela Navarrete, Richard Herts, Luciana Paredes ........................38
5. For a Wider Adoption of Smart Grids: The Case of Norway, by Christian Nota, Marie 
Gillet, Hamza Sayan.....................................................................................................................56
6. The Case Study of Uruguay’s Energy Transition, by Ana López, Anna Muizniece & Agustina 
Pérez ............................................................................................................................................68
7. Zero Energy Houses: The case of Norway, by Inês Ruas, Anastasia Velonaki, Alena Pridiri..78
5
Amsterdam Circular City: Case Study Overview, by Vittoria Tuzzi, Mathilde Chambost, 
Ines Goncalves
Vittoria Tuzzi, Mathilde Chambost, Ines Goncalves
Introduction
The concept of ‘Circular Economy’ (CE) has been gaining momentum in the last years both from an 
academic and societal point of view. The latter has been widely defined by different scholars. 
Nevertheless, a meeting point on a clear definition has not been yet found (Kirchherr et al., 2017). For the 
sake of this research, ‘Circular Economy’ shall be defined as a system which replaces the ‘end of life’ 
concept, thus, by reusing, recycling and recovering. This idea shall be applied to the concept of cities, 
thus, creating ‘circular cities’. In order to shift from a linear to a circular city, core elements of it should 
shift towards a more sustainable and resilient manner. Thus, housing, mobility, food and energy should 
transit from a more traditional way of being done or used to a more sustainable and earth friendly way 
(Van Eijk and Friedl, 2019).
This paper will focus on the city of Amsterdam, where the municipality and other actors have participated 
greatly to complete a full transition to a circular city model by 2050. In order to achieve the 2050 goal, 
new and current actors will need to play a bigger role in the transition. One of those actors is the private 
sector that until now has been a partner of the Municipality for some specific projects. The present paper 
tries to answer the following research question: ‘How can the private sector play a bigger role on the 
transition of Amsterdam to become a circular city?’. To answer it, the paper will be structured as follows. 
First a literature review will cover the concept of circular economy and circular cities, followed by the 
presentation of the chosen framework - Strategic Collective System Building Activities, by Planko (2016). 
Further, the discussed concepts and theories in the literature review will be applied to the case study of 
Amsterdam. Here, the analysis focus on the system actors, current policies, barriers to diffusion and 
possible organisational change, based on the application of the Strategic Collective System Building 
Activities framework (Planko, 2016). Thirdly, policy recommendations will be done on the basis of the 
previous work. Lastly, the conclusion will return to the research question, summarize the findings and 
pose limitations and possible further research.
Literature Review
Circular Economy
The CE thinking is based on “the recognition of the limits to planetary resource and energy use, and in 
the importance of viewing the world as a “system” where pollution and waste are viewed as a defeat” 
(Bocken et al., 2016).
To date, already 114 definitions of CE exist in literature (Kirchherr et al., 2017). Due to its hegemonic use 
in the literature and the fact that is the most complete one, the definition of the Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation was the one considered on this paper. The CE has been defined as: “an industrial system that 
is restorative or regenerative by intention and design. It replaces the end-of-life concept with restoration, 
shifts towards the use of renewable energy, eliminates the use of toxic chemicals, which impair reuse and 
return to the biosphere, and aims for the elimination of waste through the superior design of materials, 
products, systems and business models” (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013).
6
The circular approach contrasts with the traditional linear business model of production of take-make-use 
dispose and an industrial system largely reliant on fossil fuels (Bocken et al., 2016). Its main goal is to 
keep “valuable materials in circulation through a series of systemic feedback loops between life-cycle 
stages, powered through resource efficient industrial processes” (Hobson, 2015).
Circular Cities
According to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2017) a “circular city embeds the principles of a 
CE across all its functions, establishing an urban system that is regenerative, accessible and abundant by 
design”. The concept of Circular City has been defined “as a city in which, in particular, the built 
environment is designed in a modular and flexible manner; energy systems are resilient and renewable, 
consequently reducing costs and producing positive impacts on the environment; the urban mobility 
system is accessible, affordable and effective; and the production systems encourage the creation of 
local value loops” (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2015). As cities concentrate a high consumption of 
finite resources, they represent a strategic start for reducing waste with a “fully closed loop” thinking 
(Croci, 2018, Bocken et al, 2016).
Figure 1: Categorization of linear and circular approaches for reducing resource use, Source: Bocken et al. (2016)
The transition towards circular cities is only possible through a cultural paradigm shift leading to 
“innovation and adaptation in governments’ organization, business strategies, and educational structures 
(determining the supply of new products and services) as well as civil society (the “demand” side)” 
(Gravagnuolo, 2019).
Theoretical Framework: Strategic Collective System Building Activities
The successful implementation of circular cities requires a deep change in the socio-technological regime. 
The isolated correction of market-failures (e.g. direct R&D support and economic incentives) is not 
enough as the change of institutional and systemic barriers require a broader interaction between 
stakeholders.
The Circular Cities implementation has been pushed to the current political agendas by international 
organizations, national governments and academy but mainly implemented by municipalities (local) - that 
strategically give priority to activities that are under their direct responsibility (e.g. waste management that 
7
in the case of Amsterdam is done by the publicly owned company AEB (Collectors, 2020)). The private 
sector is slowly getting on board but the results of such partnerships have not seen the same impressive 
results as policies that complete its total cycle under the municipalities’ umbrella. By making use of the 
“Strategic Collective System Building” framework (Planko, 2016) this paper aims to contribute to the 
discussion on the strategic next steps to improve the private sector role in the transition of Amsterdam to 
become a circular city.
The selected framework refers to “processes and activities that firms can conduct in networks to 
collectively create a favorable environment for their innovative sustainability technology” (Planko, 2016) 
and its main goal is the creation or modification of broader institutional or organizational structures in a 
technological innovation system carried out by innovative actors (Planko, 2016).
Case Study: Amsterdam Circular City
Systemic Aspects of the Circular City and its Advantages
As of now, the current economic paradigm follows a model of take-make-waste. Though profitable, it is 
also unsustainable due to limited resources: only 9% of materials consumed are recycled (Circle 
Economy; Municipality Amsterdam, 2017). On the contrary, the objective of a CE is to eliminate waste 
from the system by closing loops of energy and material flows (Meini, Facchini, & Papa, 2019; Bocken, 
2016). In 2015, the Netherlands adopted this strategy and set two gradual objectives: first, to reduce by 
50% the use of primary raw materials by 2030, and second, to be 100% circular by 2050 (Circle Economy 
& City of Amsterdam, 2018; Mené, 2020).
The city of Amsterdam, aware of the benefits of a CE, reacted quickly to the government’s decision and 
developed a vision of the city as a living ecosystem. The circular model adapted to the city has the 
particularity to have a holistic approach with objectives in terms of competitiveness, environmental 
sustainability (reducing waste and greenhouse gas emissions) and social inclusion (creating circular jobs 
and reducing inequality). It calls for the participation, environmental responsibility and inclusion of all 
societal actors and gives particular attention to the development of new technologies.
Amsterdam Circular City History
The journey which is leading Amsterdam to be a circular city dates back to 2015. Several deals, 
publications and policies have been done in order to reach the desired goal. The latter, together with the 
role of the actors in the city played a crucial role in making Amsterdam circular. A sustainability agenda 
has already been published in March 2015, which was the milestone for further advancements in the next 
three years. Other important documents, which will be further detailed in the analysis of current policies,
are the Waste Implementation Plan (published in June 2016) and the Circular Innovation programme 
2016 - 2018 (published in November 2016). Together with the latter mentioned documents, various 
publications have been able to create a consistent and clear framework to reach the set goal.
Moreover, Amsterdam has already made a plan forward for 2020 - 2021 and 2020 - 2025. For instance, 
the 2020-2025’s strategy focuses on three specific value chains, namely, food and organic waste streams, 
consumer goods and built environment (Gemeente Amsterdam, 2019). The vision is the one of building a 
strong understanding of the circularity benefits for the city and its citizens. Nevertheless, a strong 
cooperation between actors is necessary.
8
Figure 2: Development of the circular project in Amsterdam, Source: Circle Economy & City of Amsterdam, 2018, 
Accessible: https://journey.circle-economy.com/circularamsterdam#173749
Amsterdam Circular City Actors
The role of the various actors around the project of making Amsterdam a circular city is extremely 
important. This is due to the fact that great commitment and cooperation is needed in order to reach the 
set goals. Thus, several actors shall be recognized, namely, the municipality, citizens and private and 
public sector stakeholders, such as local businesses and nonprofit organizations (NGOs) (CampbellJohnston, Cate, Elfering-Petrovic, Gupta, 2019).
Both private and public actors are necessary for different reasons. At a first glance a top down approach, 
implemented by the Municipality, seemed to be the one used in order to increase the circularity of 
Amsterdam. However, a few bottom up initiatives have shown the interest of the civil society (customers, 
users, local community…) to be part of the Circular transition (Circle Economy, 2019). A great example 
of that, is the creation of the Zuidoost Food Forest (under the Circular City Plan), done by residents of 
the K - District in order to increase biodiversity and make the area more climate proof (Gemeente 
Amsterdam, 2019). Such initiatives show not only how the population is aware of the need to make the 
city more circular, but also how citizens can be an active part of doing so. Thus, they are representing one 
of the main actors for the circularity of Amsterdam.
Nevertheless, the main fundamental actor in making Amsterdam a circular city is the Municipality itself. 
The Municipality has acted as a planner and implementer but also as an orchestrator of the active 
cooperation with private sector stakeholder and research institutes, such as universities or research and 
knowledge centres (Circle Economy, 2019). Such research has focused on product development for the 
value chains of Construction and Biomass & Food (Gemeente Amsterdam, 2019). The municipality 
played also an important role by spreading the outcomes of these researches, through public campaigns to 
impact consumer acceptance. The design of the Circular Economy Plans has been commissioned by the 
Municipality to the Circle Economy - a non-profit organisation that empowers a global community to 
accelerate the transition to the circular economy - (Circle Economy, 2019).
9
Regional, national and international governments also play a crucial role to enable the transition to a 
circular economy (Circle Economy, 2019). From a regional point of view, providing support to housing
corporation, construction and urban plans for new districts is an important milestone. From a broader 
perspective, thus, national and international, the various legal frameworks and different guidelines to 
municipalities and businesses play a crucial role. This is due to the fact that such measures provide the 
basis for all the different actors to cooperate and actively work towards embedding the circularity 
principles.
For instance, private businesses cooperated with the Municipality in some particular circular projects 
(Circle Economy, 2019). In order to do so, the Municipality created instruments, as financial support, 
throughout loans or tax incentives to improve the business circularity of private firms (such as food 
vendors and producers, construction companies, wholesale suppliers and distributors, private waste 
collectors, manufacturing firms…). Cooperation, on the supply and demand side, was also promoted 
through the expansion of already available recycled and reusable materials markets, involving repair 
businesses, with the objective to close construction industry loops (Gemeente Amsterdam, 2019). Other 
private businesses shall be taken into consideration, such as financial or start-ups advisors and 
consultancies but also urban planning, developing and engineering firms (Circle Economy, 2019). While 
on one hand, the advisors can develop new investment strategies, bring innovation and develop new 
techniques to for instance, manage water and waste. On the other hand, urban planners can incorporate 
the strategies created and move towards a more sustainable framework. An example has been the one in 
the Haven-Stad area of Amsterdam. Here with the support of financial advisors, urban planner are 
working towards building new houses which will produce 75% less of Co2 emissions, mobility which 
would not pollute, rainproof districts and half of the resources to be reused and 65% of waste separation 
(Gemeente Amsterdam, 2017).
From the public point of view, NGOs and interest groups can collaborate with public service providers 
and the civil society (Circle Economy, 2019). This can be done starting from the NGOs which can bring 
their knowledge on for instance, relevant environmental content to make the civil society engage more in 
local initiatives and public service providers to explore alternative ways to cope with for instance, housing 
services (Gemeente Amsterdam, 2019). Moreover, also Knowledge Institutions (Circle Economy, 2019), 
such as universities play a role in assessing, for instance, how environmental friendly some products can 
be and investigate on the impact and the way materials are composed. Amsterdam relies widely on 
institutes such as the Dutch Institute for Building Biology and Ecology NIBE (Gemeente Amsterdam, 
2019).
In order to complete a full transition, a multiple level actor integration is needed (Campbell-Johnston et 
Al., 2019) but it is urgent to upgrade the relationship between Businesses and the Municipality. Those 
need to pass from being isolated circular project partners to being fully integrated in the circular system 
(with circular business models, offering circular products and services with life-cycle extension and 
promoting material resources efficiency (Gemeente Amsterdam, 2019).
Amsterdam Circular City Current Policies
According to Amsterdam Circular – Evaluation and Action Perspectives, since 2015, the city has 
completed over 73 projects that contribute towards a CE. CE is the leading theme of the city’s 
Sustainability Agenda that originated Amsterdam Circular: Vision and Roadmap for City and Region. This 
last plan is the umbrella for:
10
• Learning by Doing (plan that focused on 26 projects about procurement and land development).
• Circular Innovation Programme (that developed 30 projects in collaboration with market parties 
and knowledge institutes).
• Waste Implementation Plan (that completed 5 projects).
• Other 12 projects developed separately by the municipality.
After identifying the most effective areas of intervention, the Municipality decided to prioritize five value 
chains that represented the largest (volume wise) material streams: Construction, Biomass & Food, 
Plastics, Manufacturing and Consumer goods, prioritizing the first two. Some of the key strategies for the 
Biomass chain were the development of a biorefinery hub, cascading organic residues and extracting 
phosphate from waste residues. For the Construction chain the plan included smart design 
implementation, dismantling and separation, reuse and recycling facilitated by developing a secondary 
market and material bank. For these projects, the municipality brought on board about 100 businesses.
The overall results have proven that the CE is both realistic and profitable. However, several barriers 
interfere with the systemic transition and especially with its appeal to have more private stakeholders on 
board.
Amsterdam Circular City Barriers to Diffusion
The municipality of Amsterdam qualifies the city as a ‘living lab’ (Circle Economy; Municipality 
Amsterdam, 2017). Through the programmes Learning by Doing, Circular Innovation Programme and 
Waste Implementation Plan, the city promotes the implementation and experimentation of innovative 
solutions to make the transition to a CE. Such plans have been the nest for projects such as the “De 
Ceuvel”, a symbol of the social transition to a circular lifestyle. Considered as a circular office park, it was 
built out of recycle materials (such as old boat houses) and uses innovative technologies to recycle the 
waste it produces and to be energy self-sufficient (De Ceuvel, 2019). “De Ceuvel” is an example of 
successful transition to circularity.
Nonetheless, De Ceuvel remains a small-scaled project. If the city of Amsterdam wishes to scale-up these 
projects and make a full transition from a linear to a CE, it will undoubtedly face challenges. As 
Campbell-Johnston points out, there can be barriers to this transition that can be hard, that is relying on 
technology and the market, and soft, meaning institutional/regulatory and cultural (2019). In the case of 
Amsterdam, what has been the source of critics is the fact that the city is limited in creating a closed loop 
because of focusing on end-of-pipe solutions.
11
Figure 4: Barriers to the transition from a linear to a circular economy, Source: Kirchherr, et al., 2017
As pointed out previously, the city’s efforts are concentrated on two value chains: construction and, 
biomass and food. In the case of construction, the municipality wishes to close the loop by reusing and 
recycling secondary materials and use non-finite resources. However, it has encountered challenges in 
terms of market, culture and regulation. First, the current linear market is an open market in which 
competition exists. Secondary materials have to compete with cheaper products that come from raw 
materials and/or form finite resources. Second, cultural barriers are crucial as existing practices are deeply 
rooted within the system and, trust and transparency between the partners and clients need to be 
enhanced. Third, institutional and regulatory barriers may be the most challenging as the actors from the 
municipality needs to be consistent and coherent in their strategy for the CE. Here, Campbell-Johnston 
shows that some departments of the municipality are not always open for change which impedes the 
transition. Though, technological barriers are not mentioned in the case of the construction sector as they 
are considered less important and easier to overcome than the three others.
Moreover, the city of Amsterdam is facing another, yet important, challenge to the transition to CE. The 
municipality is limited in its scope of action due to its powers being limited the city boundaries. The 
municipality does not have the capacity to use legislative and fiscal instruments to enhance the transition. 
Hence, it is crucial that the municipality takes action and lobbies in favour of CE at the national level. An 
initiative was launched to review Dutch legislation in order to support CE (Jonker & Montenegro 
Navarro, 2019). Nevertheless, the municipality’ capacities will remain limited and dependent on national 
legislation.
Missing Policies - Private and Public Relations and Institutional Change for Wider Diffusion
In order to complete a successful system transition, the city needs to proceed with strategic changes to 
have the private sector fully on board. By using the “Strategic Collective System Building” framework 
(Planko, 2016), this paper aims to make a contribution on the improvement of private stakeholders role in 
the transition of Amsterdam to become a full Circular City. For that purpose, each key area of the 
selected framework was analyzed.
12
Figure 5: Overview of the strategy framework for system building and its system-building activities, Source: Planko, 
2016
Technology development and optimization: When looking at table 1, we understand that this section was the one 
where more projects were developed. However, those were mainly conducted by Research Institutes and 
not by companies. By having firms on board since this stage, there would be a time reduction between the 
R&D phase and the adoption of such technologies, improving the efficiency on the supply side and 
taking early into account the limitations that firms face when commercializing the new technologies.
Coordination: The Municipality has shown a strong leadership capacity both on the local implementation 
but also in the influence of National and International Agendas. However, as mentioned before the 
priority has focused on the top-down control of chains that are mainly controlled by the municipality 
itself. Even though, that is an effective strategy to achieve short-term results, the municipality needs to 
position itself more as stakeholder coordinator and less as an implementer.
Socio-cultural changes: In order to make the Circular City transition more attractive to firms, the municipality 
needs to focus on the change of ‘consumer acceptance’ (Aldersgate Group, 2012). By focusing on the 
consumer education and engagement (Lee et al., 2012), the municipality would reinforce the creation of ‘a 
new contract between businesses and their customers’ (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013) and would 
increase the demand for the firms technology.
Market creation: Until now, this system transition has focused on reforming some parts of the existing 
market and not on fully creating a new one – resulting on maladjustment of supply and demand. To fully 
close the loop, the Municipality needs to support firms to become circular (e.g. by helping on the creation 
of new business models or protected niche markets) and not only by involving them on isolated circular 
projects (Jonker, 2017). In order to make it more attractive both on the demand and supply side, the 
municipality needs also to fight price disparity through the creation of price-control mechanisms (e.g. 
legislation).
13
Policy Recommendations 
The concept of circularity is about to become a key element of urban organization. Cities evolve rapidly 
and are expected to host two thirds of the world’s population by 2050 (World Bank, 2020). As of now, 
cities consume 75% of natural resources, produce over 50% of of global waste and emit between 60 and 
80% of greenhouse gases (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2020; OECD, 2019). Similar outcomes are 
expected for the city of Amsterdam; in 2017, Amsterdam reached over 855,000 inhabitants and is 
expected to reach 1 million by mid-2030. The pressure on key societal needs, such as mobility, nutrition 
and housing, is increasing. As shown previously, the city of Amsterdam is a worldwide leader in the 
implementation of a circular model. Nonetheless, it did not yet fully adopt this model. If the City of 
Amsterdam wishes to be fully circular by 2050, it needs to make a transition towards the model of 
circularity and abandon the current paradigm of the linear economy, take-make-waste.
Hence, the following policy recommendations to take the circular economy transition to a next level:
Policy recommendation No 1: Reframe the strategy behind “Circular Economy Directions” to focus on process 
adaptation/damage prevention and sustainable technologies promotion, rather than end-of-pipe solutions.
The main improvement on the strategy for the period of 2020-2025 (Circle Economy, 2019) was done on 
the amplification of the value chains that were considered to be part of the Circular Economy transition 
Plan (Construction, Biomass and food, Consumer goods). However, the “Directions” designed for each 
value-chain still focus on end-of-pipe solutions (e.g.: Construction: Scale-up circular dismantling and 
mono-stream collection, Support the use of renewable and secondary construction materials... Biomass 
and food: minimise food waste from retail, catering and households, Increase separate organized waste 
collection from households and businesses, Scale- high value transformation of residual biomass… 
Consumer goods: stimulate recycling of complex consumer goods, encourage the shared and long-term 
use of products…). End of pipe solutions are incremental solutions and they represent a medium to low 
impact on resource efficiency and low impact on emissions (Mulder, 2007). By diversifying the portfolio 
of solutions and including more sustainable technologies and process adaptation/damage prevention, the 
Municipality would treat the problem at its source and increase the impact of its actions.
Policy recommendation No 2: Build mechanisms to shift the Municipality’s relationship with businesses from a suggestive 
character to a binding one.
The reach of the Municipality on legislation and regulation is limited, as those instruments are under the 
national and international government domain. As a result of such barrier, the recommendations and the 
participation of businesses for the period of 2020-2025 (Circle Economy, 2019) focus on general 
recommendations as “Startups and Scale-ups: develop innovations and realistic solutions”, “Banks: 
provide financial support models to enable scale-up” or “Food vendors: purchase food products from 
local producers”. Even though the Municipality cannot make such suggestions mandatory, there are 
other facilitation mechanisms that can be used in order to increase the interest of such actors on a circular 
economy transition. The increment of network platforms to allow the matching of supplier and vendors, 
the direct support for the structuration/restructuration of startups and scale-ups business models and the 
creation of shared financial support programmes in partnership with banks are some of the mechanisms 
that would transform the mentioned recommendations on concrete actions and take the incentives to 
businesses given by the Municipality to a next level of concretization.
Conclusion
As it was evidenced during the present analysis (and by the City evaluation reports), there is much room 
“for business as usual”. Both private sector and Municipality are still in an “innovator phase”, and it is the 
14
Municipality role to scale it up with the private sector in order to take the transition to the next phase. But 
the question is “how can circular projects be scaled up and become the new standard?”. In order to 
answer that, the City has presented a new Circular Plan for 2020-2025, which prioritizes the value chains 
of Construction, Biomass and Food, and Consumer Goods and focus on expanding procurement 
instruments and deployment of research, information provision and networks.
This paper has been answering the research question as to ‘How can the private sector play a bigger role 
on the transition of Amsterdam to become a circular city?’. From the results it is visible how the need of 
having more circularity and thus, sustainable cities represents a vital issue for the safety of our planet and 
of the worldwide population. The Amsterdam Case Study provided us with interesting insights of how 
the process towards a CE is a long one which needs cooperation between actors and great policy efforts. 
It has been highlighted that more cooperation and participation is needed from the private sector to reach 
the goal by 2050. Moreover, this example shall be considered of great importance as to other European 
and worldwide cities.
Lastly, the reader shall acknowledge possible limitations to the paper. First, we tried to reach via email 
some members of the Amsterdam Gemeente, which were related to the circle economy, however, we did 
not receive any answer. Nevertheless, we relied on official documents released by the Municipality itself in 
order to tackle this limitation. Another limitation which shall be acknowledge, is that the specificic 
framework of System Building Activities from Planko has been chosen. This research has shown that 
private participation to the transition to a circular economy was not sufficient and needed to be enhanced. 
This is a firm-centric framework and was designed to serve the purpose of enhancing firms activities to 
stimulate new technologies. Because of that, the present analysis do not focus on the activities to be done 
by other relevant stakeholders. For a broader analysis, it would be also recommended to combine this 
framework with a system-centric one, in order to achieve more holistic results.

Introduction
Scarce land resources mean Singapore’s agricultural sector is in a Lilliputian state; approximately 90% of 
the nation’s total food consumption is produced in other countries (Tortajada & Zhang, 2016). As a 
result, Singaporeans are highly dependent on food imports. This makes the city-state particularly 
vulnerable to disruptions in supply chains (Montesclaros & Teng, 2018). In attempts to mitigate this 
ongoing problem, increasing the amount of food produced locally is a top priority for the country.
Currently, Singapore has a small food sector. However, calls for more domestic food production and 
utilising innovative farming technology have become stronger in recent years. The former Minister for 
National Development argued that Singapore’s domestic farmers “…must invest in technology and adopt 
efficient farming methods so that they can grow more with less land and fewer workers." (AVA, 2013). 
The Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority of Singapore (AVA) has created a food security roadmap to 
ensure the nation is not at risk of supply shortages in the future. A core tenet of this roadmap is boosting 
local food production (Tortajada & Zhang, 2016). The AVA is also actively encouraging firms to take 
onboard existing agricultural technologies from overseas (AVA, 2013). There is a political will for 
Singaporeans to explore innovative ways to produce food locally. Considering the limited land resources 
available to the country, this will not be an easy task (Tortajada & Zhang, 2016). The following paper 
explores the extent to which aquaponics can help address issues of food security and sustainability in 
Singapore.
Aquaponics is not a new technology. Developed in the late 20th century, it combines the culturing of 
plants and fish by recirculating a contained water system (Bartelme et al, 2018). Aquaponics technology is 
in line with the country’s goal to promote a sustainable agriculture system. It can help boost productivity, 
efficiently utilise land resources, and use technology that supports farming that can be scalable within the 
cramped city-state (Rut & Davies, 2018). Crucially, the technology is seen as a potential solution to 
improving food security and resilience (Goddek et al., 2015), which would help urban environments like 
Singapore.
The main research question of this paper is: “To what extent can aquaponics be a solution to urban food 
challenges in Singapore?”. Besides, three important sub-questions will also be asked. Firstly, how can 
aquaponics have a wider application and be a sustainable business solution? Secondly, what are the main 
ways of improving aquaponics (processes & actors)? Thirdly, what are the blocking mechanisms that slow 
down or hinder further development of this technology? The authors of this paper undertook research of 
primary sources to help inform the discussions and policy recommendations. This involved interviewing 
three experts in the field of food security and sustainability in Singapore, including Dr Paul Teng, Adjunct 
Senior Fellow at the Centre for Non-Traditional Security Studies at Nanyang Technological University; 
Jose Ma. Luis P. Montesclaros, Associate Fellow at the same institute; and Allan Lim, the Founder and 
Chairman at ComCrop - the first commercial rooftop farming company in Singapore.
In order to sufficiently address these questions, the paper provides a complex analysis of aquaponics, the 
policy implications surrounding the technology, and recommendations for policymakers in Singapore. 
Section two goes on to provide a more detailed explanation of the technology and the third part considers 
the conceptual framework applied in this paper. This framework offers a mechanism for analysing 
18
emerging sustainable technologies. Moving onto the fourth section, a discussion focusing on the main 
actors involved and the overall sustainable innovation system will be provided. This leads to policy 
recommendations in the penultimate section of this paper. Finally, a short conclusion summarises the 
overall message.
Aquaponics: Understanding Technology
Aquaponics is an integrated system of two technologies: recirculation of aquaculture (fish farming) and 
hydroponics (soilless cultivation of crops) (König et al, 2018). The working principle of the aquaponics 
system is quite simple and evident 
in Figure 1. Nutrient-rich effluents 
produced by the fish in a large 
tank are used as fertilisers for the 
plant beds. The roots of the plant 
and rhizobacteria feed on the 
nutrients from the water resulting 
in clean water favourable for fish 
to live in. Creating a sustainable 
model of a food production 
system where the waste product 
of one biological system (fish) 
serves as nutrients for another 
biological system (vegetable beds) 
(Diver, 2006). In addition, this 
polyculture of fish and plants 
increases diversity and generates a 
variety of products. Furthermore,
this system conserves key 
resources as it uses less water than 
traditional agricultural methods, which can be reused. Lastly, local food generation addresses the issue of 
food security and contributes to the local economy (Diver, 2006).
Ideal Conditions for Aquaponics System
Appropriate tank selection: Selecting the appropriate tank and ensuring that it is clean are important 
considerations. The use of inert plastic or fibreglass tanks which are round with flat bottom is advisable. 
This is due to their greater durability and that they are easy to clean (FAO, 2015).
Sufficient aeration and water circulation: In order to ensure a healthy culture of animals and plants, it is vital to 
have a high level of dissolved oxygen and proper water flow. Hence, it is advisable to use water and air 
pumps, while also using photovoltaic power. This reduces electricity costs. FAO (2015) recommends the 
following key water quality parameters that should be monitored and controlled: the level of dissolved 
oxygen (5mg/litre), pH level (6-7), temperature (18-30 °C).
Clean and balanced fish density in tanks: For ease of maintenance, the fish stocking density needs to be 
20kg/1000 litres, which is sufficient for plant growth. It also needs lower maintenance as opposed to 
highly dense areas that require more active maintenance. The nutrients needed for fish are injected in the 
water every day, however, the extra and uneaten food needs to be removed every 30 minutes to prevent 
rotting which can eat up the oxygen and can cause diseases for the fish. This prevents any disruptions in 
the balance of the system (FAO, 2015).
Figure 1: Aquaponics a sustainable system
Source: Adapted by authors based on Cornell University Blog
19
Appropriate selection of plants and animals: For the steady harvest of fish and plants, a batch cropping system 
is used. It is recommended that plants which have short grow-out periods such as salad greens are grown 
in between longer-term crops (e.g. aubergine). This method provides naturally shared conditions which 
are very useful for aquaponics to function (FAO, 2015).
The species of fish that are suitable for aquaponics culture are tilapia, trout, catfish, carp, largemouth bass, 
ornamental fish, and invertebrates. This is due to the reason that these fish are able to thrive in crowded 
conditions, resistant to disease, parasites, fluctuating oxygen levels, and pH fluctuations (Green & 
Vibrant, 2020). However, only tilapia and bluegill are suitable for commercial aquaponics. The plants 
suitable for aquaponics are mostly leafy such as basils, salad greens, kale, bok choi, head lettuce, tomatoes, 
and cucumbers (Nelson & Pade Aquaponics, 2020).
Conceptualising Aquaponics: Technological Innovation System
Technological Innovation System (TIS) – a heuristic analytical construct widely used for the analysis of 
emerging (sustainable) technologies. Due to its systemic approach that it goes beyond the boundaries of 
neo-classical guidance and its emphasis on market failures, TIS provides a comprehensive overview of 
various factors essential for sustainable innovation (Jacobsson & Bergek, 2011). The framework identifies 
seven areas for possible intervention and points out the blocking mechanisms that might hinder the 
further development of aquaponics technology and the formation of its TIS. Figure 2 briefly introduces 
the seven TIS functions and measurements used for capturing the activities. according to which the 
analysis of the following section is structured and presented.
TIS function Description of activities Measurements
Knowledge 
development and 
diffusion
Function pertains to the existing knowledge base and how it 
changes, develops and diffuses over time. There are 
different types of knowledge development – from R&D to 
learning from new applications and products to imitation. 
Bibliometrics (orientation, 
citations, publications), 
number of R&D projects, 
and learning curves.
Influence on the 
direction of 
search
Combination of factors that incentivize firms and other 
organizations to enter a (newly developed) TIS. While on 
one side there are different competing mechanisms that 
include technologies, markets and business models, on the 
other different incentives to enter the innovation system are 
provided. 
Beliefs in growth potential, 
visions and motivations, tax 
regimes. 
Entrepreneurial 
experimentation
The importance of vibrant experimentation without which 
the TIS will stagnate. By exploring and exploiting new 
opportunities, experimenting with new technologies, 
markets and institutions, actors can reduce uncertainty and 
help TIS evolve. 
A number of new entrants, 
and diversified incumbent 
companies; different types 
of application of a particular 
technology. 
Market formation Practices that protect new technologies and help them to 
grow and compete with embedded ones. Such practices 
include the creation of niche markets, the introduction of 
favourable tax regimes and/or minimal consumption 
quotes. 
Market size and customer 
groups, examination of the 
role standards and actor’s 
strategies.
Legitimation Social acceptance and compliance with relevant institutions; 
actions to counteract resistance to change. Lobbying 
activities to put the technology on the political agenda. 
Perceptions of a new 
technology, the activities 
that are likely to increase 
legitimacy.
Resource 
mobilisation
Function combines human resources with financial capital, 
stresses the importance of complementary assets that 
include additional products and services, as well as network 
infrastructure needed for a TIS to evolve. 
A number and quality of 
human resources, the rising 
volume of seed and venture 
capital, complementary 
assets.
20
Development of 
positive 
externalities
Development of positive externalities, otherwise known as 
knowledge diffusion through networks, addresses the 
importance of information/ knowledge exchange between 
networks. It has both pecuniary and non-pecuniary sideeffects. 
Attempts to capture pooled 
labour markets, acceptance, 
political power, specialized 
intermediaries, information 
and knowledge flow. 
Figure 2: TIS Framework Developed by the authors based on Bergek et al., 2008 & Jacobsson & Bergek, 2011.
Discussion
Importing around 90% of its food, Singapore relies heavily on suppliers overseas. Challenged by high 
urban density, rising population, and land scarcity, the country has been experimenting with sustainable 
urban and high-tech farming, besides diversifying its import sources, to ensure food security and 
increased self-sufficiency in its food supply. According to the Singapore Food Agency (SFA), only 13% of 
all the vegetables, 9% of all the fish, 24% of all the eggs consumed in the country are produced locally. 
Recognising land scarcity and that less than 1% of the country’s total landmass (about 1500 hectares) is 
dedicated to agricultural production, Singapore has been scaling up its efforts to capitalise on unused 
urban surfaces, like rooftops and sky gardens, to add on to productive spaces without increasing the 
acreage of agricultural land. The Government has set out a ‘30 by 30’ strategy where it aims to increase 
the country’s self-sufficiency in food production from its current level of 10% to 30% by the year 2030, 
by being ‘prudent and strategic’ with its use of limited space (Singaporean MFA, 2018). The strategy 
prioritises the production of leafy vegetables, fish, and eggs as these are not only the most consumed food 
in Singapore but also are considered to be the food that is more vulnerable to future supply shocks as 
they cannot be stored (Montesclaros interview, June 2020).
While Singapore tops the Global Food Security Index as the most food-secure country in the world, it 
faces unique challenges in natural resources and resilience against future food supply shows due to its 
heavy dependence on food imports, vulnerability to climate change and rising sea levels as a low-lying 
island, as well as ocean eutrophication (EIU, 2019). Increasing self-sufficiency in food supply will not only 
increase Singapore’s food security and resilience but also contribute to decreasing ‘food miles’ and the 
carbon footprint associated with importing food from overseas.
Against this background, the aquaponics 
farming system offers “self-sustainable, 
cost-effective, and eco-friendly urban 
farming” that could meet Singapore’s 
unique challenges with the potential for 
commercialisation and further urban 
integration as a way of transforming the 
country’s urban food production (Kyaw & 
Ng, 2017). Despite its great potential, 
however, aquaponics is still in its nascent 
phase of development in Singapore and 
there is a need for positive public policy 
intervention in all of the seven functional 
aspects identified in the TIS framework 
introduced above, for this emerging 
technological field to unlock its full 
potential.
Core strategies Supporting strategies
Diversity sources if imports R&D
Invest 
abroad
Industry 
development
Food wastage reduction
Strengthen infrastructure
Strategies offsetting 
limitations in diversification
Financial instruments
Local 
production
Stockpiling Welfare / Affordability
Enabling strategies
Cross-government coordination
Emergency planning
Communication
Market monitoring
Fiscal, legal and regulatory framework
Figure 3: Singapore Food Security Road Map Source: AVA, 2012
21
System Building
Singapore's aquaponics sector is small. According to our interview with Allan Lim, aquaponics was 
introduced to the country in 2013/14. He owns the company which developed the first farm on a rooftop 
and provided fresh food to nearby hotels (The Straits Times, 2016). In more recent years, the Fairmont 
Hotel in Singapore has developed its own aquaponics system. By August this year, they aim to produce 
1,200kg of vegetables and 350kg of fish monthly for themselves and a neighbouring hotel (Teo, 2019). 
For now, this is the extent of the aquaponics history in the city-state.
A 2020 article by Ai Nah suggests that “Singapore is well-positioned to be the next great place for urban 
agriculture, given our deep research and development expertise in engineering and manufacturing, probusiness environment and global connectivity.” The rich environment of innovation and technology in 
Singapore makes it a feasible marketplace for agri-tech opportunities (Ai Nah, 2020). “The presence of 
active agri-tech and fintech entities in Singapore offers much promise to attract new investment into the 
food sector” (Teng & Montesclaros, 2019). Since the launch of the ‘30 by 30’ strategy, there has been a 
boom in the agri-tech startups (Ai Kok, 2020). Additionally, the Government is supporting this strategy 
wholeheartedly by providing the right expertise and access to capital.
To bring more stakeholders and to uncover more promising agri-tech players, Singapore conducts 
competitions like Ag-Ignite which creates a pitching platform for several agri-tech enthusiasts. These sorts 
of events play an important role in bringing innovation, financing, and internationalization opportunities 
(Ai Nah, 2020). The Ministry of Trade, Enterprise Singapore (ESG) has also been providing full support 
to the ‘30 by 30’ strategy global investment in the food sector. The key investment wing of ESG is SEED 
capital which co-invests more than S$65m with seven other partners to encourage Singapore-based agritech startups. These venture capital firms not only provide finances but also mentorship, and serve as a 
playground to innovate by organising ‘hackathons’ and accelerator programs (Ai Kok, 2020).
In Singapore motivations and expectations regarding the aquaponics is mixed, thus posing a question 
whether backing up the technology is reasonable. The technology has a potential to be scaled up and 
become a part of the existing agri-food ecosystem (Kyaw & Ng, 2017), gradually contributing to the 
Government's ‘30 by 30’ strategy (Montesclaros & Teng, 2019). However, the debate on how aquaponics 
can make this happen needs further examination. On one hand, aquaponics can be applied on a small 
scale and offers a space-saving alternative. On the other hand, the question of whether an aquaponic 
system has something unique to offer to the market still remains to be under-explored (König et al., 2018; 
Teng et al., 2019). The system combines both aquaculture and hydroponics. Looking from a theoretical 
point of view, it seems to serve as a more efficient food production technology. In practice, however, 
further research is needed to inform about different aspects of this agri-food system. Questions of such 
research should include the following: What is the perfect balance of nutrients for plants to not get fooddeprived? - an issue some researchers refer to as yellowing. What kinds of crops, besides herbs and fruits, 
can be produced from an aquaponic system? Is there any other fish, besides tilapia, that is relatively 
robust and more attractive to consumers than imported fish (Teng interview, May 2020)?
While currently there are only a few actors in the field which exclusively promote aquaponic technology 
in Singapore, the Government's new approach to self-sufficiency and plausible future crisis such as 
COVID-19 can act as a window of opportunity for further development of this technology (Teng 
interview, May 2020). In other words, aquaponics can benefit from a changing landscape of food security 
in Singapore. The Government’s recent efforts to further scale up local agricultural production within the 
next two years as well as strengthening food resilience, with the introduction of an additional S$30 million 
‘express grant’ in the face of the coronavirus crisis, can be taken as a clear indication that the nation is 
more receptive than ever to cutting-edge, resource-efficient and climate resistance technologies and new 
22
modes of production in its agri-food industry (Choo, 2019). The grant aims to crowdsource innovative 
ideas and approaches in the agri-food industry for producing food sustainably. It would not only improve 
the local food production but also potentially create better jobs in the industry and help the SMEs 
(Singapore Government, 2020).
A multi-agency task force under the Ministry of Environment and Water Resources (MEWR) is set up to 
oversee the ramp-up of the activity, to address the hurdles faced in expanding the farms and ensuring its 
productivity and sustainability. The important factor here is the support from the demand of consumers. 
The higher the demand, the higher the productivity of farmers would be and it would allow the farmers to 
take benefits of economies of scale (Singapore Government, 2020). This is how the executives attempt to 
generate positive externalities by capturing pooled labour markets, fostering the acceptance of the 
technology and creating specialised intermediates to oversee them.
Aquaponics is a knowledge-intensive system. It requires expertise of the local context to meet the needs 
of consumers and be economically viable. The technical part of aquaponics can be easily understood. 
However, the implementation phase of technology has some challenges. Here, the mobilisation of human 
and financial resources is of high importance (König et al., 2018). With a few experimentational attempts 
to run aquaponic gardens, there is only one commercialised aquaponic farm in Singapore that has been 
recently introduced by Fairmont Singapore and Swissôtel The Stamford. The project is a part of the 
hotels’ sustainability strategy aiming at making it more self-sufficient by producing fresh ingredients for its 
restaurants and cafes and reducing the transportation costs, including time, money, and carbon emission. 
Apart from this, however, only a handful of other local actors work and experiment with the aquaponics 
technology. Financial resources are also not exclusively allocated to technology-specific projects for 
further experimentation, development and commercialisation of the technology (Teng interview, May 
2020). Nevertheless, the nature of aquaponic technology allows it to benefit from existing infrastructure, 
as well as research focused on aquaculture and hydroponics. However, one should not forget that 
experimentation with local production of greens and fish that potentially competes with imported goods 
takes time and patience (Teng et al, 2019). In addition, mobilising human and financial resources for 
further development of aquaponic technology is valuable when production does not compete so much 
with existing technologies and provide additional value to the market (Montesclaros & Teng, 2018).
Given that the technology is not yet widely used in the country, legitimacy needs to be considered for any 
aquaponics sector to form (Bergek et al, 2008). In the context of Singapore, the legitimation of 
aquaponics has not yet taken place. However, in recent years there have been significant acts to boost the 
legitimacy of a new technology innovation system which involves boosting local production and 
investment in new technologies which aid in this effort (AVA, 2013). Recently, the MEWR and SFA 
announced that they would be ensuring that vacant sites and industrial spaces can be used as alternative 
farming locations. Additionally, both the Deputy Prime Minister and many members of the legislature 
have called for developing Singapore’s domestic food production even further. These all demonstrate 
efforts to legitimise an increase in the production of local food and the use of emerging technologies to 
meet this ambition (Liu, 2020), as well as overcoming resistance to change and to help put new 
technology onto the policy agenda (Planko et al, 2016).
The Singaporean Government has put in place generous R&D funding programs under the 2012 Food 
Security Road Map. An Inter-Ministry Committee was specifically set up for food security and its focus 
was to develop the supporting strategy described in Figure 3. The committee works closely with farmers 
to increase productivity by using the innovative technology given the limited farmland available. In order 
to boost productivity and encourage the farmers to adopt technology, the S$63m Agricultural 
Productivity Fund (APF) was launched in 2014. The AVA bridges the gap between the farmers and 
technology by establishing training plans for farmers, conducts R&D in partnership with the industries 
23
and research institutes to find innovative methods to increase productivity in local farms. Various 
publicity outreach programs, public education programs in the supermarkets, at Food Expos etc were 
launched to support the strategy for Singapore food security roadmap (Ai Kok, 2020).
Actors Mapping
Various actors and stakeholders play an important role in the development and diffusion of aquaponics 
systems in Singapore. In mapping the actors, our analysis employs the ‘Penta-helix’ model (see Figure 4), 
where actors from different sectors interact with each other and facilitate the further development and 
diffusion of the technology. While the government sets ambitious goals for food self-sufficiency and 
provides generous funds and incentives for sustainable local food production technologies, including 
aquaponics, it also ensures the harmonisation and coordination of policies needed to have an aquaponicfriendly regulatory framework. In other words, the government employs the roles of planner, sponsor, 
and regulator (Kemp, 2000).
Figure 4: Actors mapping Developed by the authors 
In addition, the private sector introduces sustainable business models and applies aquaponics technology 
as a part of its sustainability agenda. Currently, two luxury hotels, Fairmount & Swissôtel, pave the way 
for commercialised and financially viable aquaponic farms becoming a reality, despite their shortcomings. 
Academia is another important pillar that engages in research and development activities and seeks to 
unleash the potential of aquaponic systems and identify how they can further contribute to local food 
production.
Research institutions and universities also play an important role in capacity development and bring a new 
generation of graduates trained in domestic food production and processing. Furthermore, civil society is 
very much linked to the acceptance of locally produced food in the case of aquaponics technology. 
 
Public
 *Ministry of Trade and Industry
*Agri-Food & Veterinary Authority 
of Singapore 
* Ministry of Environment and 
Water Resources
 * Inter-Ministry Committee
 * Singapore Food Agency 
 Academia
 * Nanyang Poly 
 * NTU Food & Technology Centre
* NUS Food Science
* Food Innovation Cluster 
 * Ngee Ann Poly 
 * TLL 
Civil society
 * Consumers old vs. young generation
* Farmers associations 
Social entrepreneurs
* ComCrop 
Private
* Enterprise Singapore (ESG)
* Fairmount & Swissôtel Hotels
* Customers from private sector 
(bars, cafes, restaurants)
24
Consumers choose to either adjust their consumption patterns and support local farmers or express 
resistance and give a priority to imported products, thus shaping the further development and diffusion 
of technology. Finally, there are social entrepreneurs, who play the role of intermediaries. Although 
ComCrop does not work with aquaponics systems anymore and produces vegetables only by using 
hydroponics, it serves as an intermediary linking actors and stakeholders from different sectors. Being the 
first enterprise that commercialised aquaponics in Singapore, it links not only the actors and stakeholders 
working with aquaculture, hydroponics and aquaponics (inter-networks) but also within the circles of 
these technologies (intra-network).
Policy Recommendations
In this section, we advocate for three sets of policy recommendations for Singaporean policymakers with 
a view to fostering further adoption and commercialisation of aquaponics technology. We argue that 
aquaponics farming provides a virtually untapped opportunity for Singapore and has the potential to 
contribute to the nation’s food security and self-sufficiency if it is employed under the right conditions 
and marketed smartly.
Recommendation I: Encourage targeted R&D to identify best practices in aquaponics that is suited to Singapore’s ecosystem 
and the population’s consumption needs and preferences.
As discussed above, aquaponics remains to be a farming technique that has been underexplored and 
underexploited in Singapore. As part of its ‘30 by 30’ initiative, the Government of Singapore has 
allocated S$144m to R&D efforts within the agrifood industry. These efforts focus on three main 
production lines, including urban agriculture, ‘future foods’, and aquaculture (Teng interview, May 2020). 
Despite generous funding for agrifood technology development there is not a targeted R&D effort 
towards identifying the best practices, including determining the right combination of microclimate, fishvegetable combinations that adapt well to the country’s ecosystem and consumption needs and 
preferences. The Government’s ambitions towards increased self-sufficiency in agro-food production call 
for experimentation with ‘future foods’ with high nutritional value and alternative proteins, this niche area 
could be integrated with the aquaponics farming technique. As argued by Dr Teng in our interview, 
aquaponics farming will have the potential to gain an edge in Singapore’s already competitive and 
saturated agrifood market if it manages to offer products with higher nutritional value than what is 
already available in the market.
Recommendation II: Provide subsidies and fiscal incentives to MSMEs engaged in aquaponics to facilitate their transition 
into commercial farming and encourage entrepreneurial experimentation.
The Government provides ample subsidies to local farmers under the APF with a view to supporting 
them in their efforts “to expand production capability, boost yield and raise productivity” (SFA, n.d.). 
However, these subsidies are typically only available to farmers who already achieved the minimum 
production level set out by the Government (Montesclaros interview, June 2020) and granted to 
‘progressive and growth-oriented’ strategic food farms producing commonly consumed items (SFA, n.d.). 
These conditions exclude smaller scale farms and start-ups who like to experiment with different farming 
techniques. Therefore, the Government needs to expand the scope of the APF to stimulate 
entrepreneurial experimentation and encourage new ventures in the agri-food sector, as well as providing 
transition funds to aquaponics farms as they expand their productive capacity as they commercialise their 
production.
Recommendation III: Design dedicated marketing strategies and carry out extensive public information campaigns to foster 
market and consumer acceptance.
25
One of the biggest challenges identified in this paper in regards to the further adoption of aquaponics 
farming technology and market expansion is market and consumer resistance. The high purchasing power 
of the population coupled with easy and relatively cheap access to premium agrifoods within the Republic 
acts as a significant blocking mechanism in front of the further expansion of the technology. Therefore, 
the Government, along with relevant stakeholders, should design dedicated marketing strategies 
highlighting high-quality and nutritional aspects of aquaponics products and their significance in regards 
to increasing the nation’s food resilience and carry out extensive PR campaigns to educate the population 
with a view to fostering market and consumer acceptance.
Conclusion
This paper analysed the implementation of aquaponics technology as a way to address urban food security 
challenges and sustainability issues in Singapore. By adopting the TIS framework as its analytical tool, the 
paper evaluated the applicability of aquaponics as a solution to future urban food challenges in Singapore 
and assessed challenges and opportunities for further adoption of the technology, across seven functions. 
In addition to making use of relevant literature and Government documents, three semi-structured 
interviews with experts from Singapore were carried out to help inform the discussions and develop 
policy recommendations.
After identifying gaps that require positive public policy intervention and relevant stakeholders needed for 
further technology adoption and commercialisation, and mapping out Singapore’s agrifood ecosystem and
Penta-helix of actors involved, we presented three policy recommendations for Singaporean 
policymakers. Firstly, we highlighted that the Government needs to encourage targeted R&D to identify 
best practices in aquaponics that is suited to Singapore’s ecosystem and the population’s consumption 
needs & preferences. While Government spending has a generous R&D support scheme under various 
grant programmes, there is limited targeted research on aquaponics. Secondly, we advocated for the 
Government to provide subsidies and fiscal incentives to MSMEs engaged in aquaponics to facilitate their 
transition into commercial farming and encourage entrepreneurial experimentation. Lastly, we 
recommended the Government, along with the industry, to design dedicated marketing strategies and 
carry out extensive public information campaigns to foster market and consumer acceptance.

Annex I: Interview Questions
1. How did the idea of aquaponics come to Singapore?
2. What are the challenges/blocking mechanisms that slow down or hinder further development of 
aquaponics in Singapore?
- Knowledge development and diffusion
- Market creation
- Entrepreneurial experimentation
- Resource mobilization (example, agriculture productivity farm by SFA)
- Legitimation
- Influence on the direction of search
3. What are the positive externalities that you believe could help with promotion and / or facilitate the 
adoption of aquaponics?
28
4. Specific policies for this technology/subsidies (is it organic food?) What are the policy barriers?
5. Can you think of any specific behavioural or consumption patterns that locals possess and that could help 
increase the demand side for aquaponics production?
6. Who are the main actors in the field of aquaponics in Singapore? Are there any stakeholders that are being 
left out or you believe could play a more important role in the development and application of this 
technology? Potential customers & Producers?
7. What are the complementary/competing agriculture technologies and what role do they play in the 
adoption / scaling-up of aquaponics in Singapore? Synergies with other technologies.
8. Whom do you see as a potential producer working with aquaponics, besides a couple of farms that are 
already experimenting with this technology?
29
Bicycle-centered Cities: An analysis on Copenhagen and Utrecht’s Bicycle Policy, by 
Elena Schmider, Max Jochem, Tim Haresma, Steff Nagel
Elena Schmider, Max Jochem, Tim Haresma, Steff Nagel
Introduction 
With an increasing population living in cities over the last decades, urban planning and mobility strategies 
have adapted to subsequent challenges. Car-centered mobility systems emerged and vehicle infrastructure 
such as parking spaces were subsidized, whilst cycling paths and pedestrianized zones were largely 
marginalized in local policy (Choi, 2014; European Cyclists Federation, 2018). Currently, the general 
public is becoming more aware of the environment effects of rising air pollution and congestion within 
urban areas (Reintjes, 2013). Transportation systems play a crucial role for cities’ sustainability transitions.
This has been increasingly realized and has since led to the adoption of more environmentally friendly,
sustainable transportation systems (Choi, 2014). As a consequence, cycling policies, which are created 
through the collaborative efforts of local governments, organizations, private sector institutions and civil 
society, evolved to become a priority issue in urban planning and sustainable development (Choi, 2014). 
Cycling-inclusive urban planning policies not only contribute in terms of decreasing congestion and air 
pollution, but also enhance quality of life in general terms (Choi, 2014). Furthermore, studies have found 
that cycling accessibility can positively impact urban economies and GDP (Reintjes, 2013).
Copenhagen and Utrecht are two cities with a long cycling tradition and bicycle-based urban mobility
strategies. In the last few years, these cities have consistently been among the top 3 of the most bicyclefriendly cities in the world (Copenhagenize Index, 2019). This study aims to analyze the current cycling 
policies within these two cities according to their ability to address system failures that arose during the 
transition period in a consistent and coherent fashion. It also provides policy recommendations to 
enhance the current situation. Firstly, this paper looks at the history of cycling and cycling policy within 
Copenhagen and Utrecht; secondly, it describes the system and stakeholders governing cycling policies 
within the two cities; thirdly, the analysis draws attention to how system failures were mitigated through 
policy; and lastly, conclusions and policy recommendations are presented.
Theoretical Framework 
In analyzing the history of the transition towards bicycle-centered mobility in Utrecht and Copenhagen, a 
Multilevel Perspective (MLP) can be invoked. This perspective is characterized as a social framework used 
to analyze sociotechnical transition and focuses on the co-structuring of three elements that influence 
systemic change: landscape factors; regimes; and niche-level factors (Geels and Kemp, 2007). More 
specifically, these refer to the interaction of sociotechnical systems, rules and formal or informal 
institutions, and social groups (Geels and Kemp, 2007). 
The two case studies present an example of a system transition, rather than a system reproduction or 
transformation, because both involves a shift away from one sociotechnical regime (cars) and towards 
another (bicycles). This is stimulated by influences at the landscape, regime and niche levels, which is 
characteristic of transition-type change. 
Copenhagen, Denmark, has a long tradition of cycling as a means of transportation. In the first half of the 
20th century biking became the most common form of transportation in the city, a trend that was 
significantly influenced by the popularization of six-day bike races that peaked in popularity in the 1960’s 
(Elmgreens, 2020). Similar to other European cities, Copenhagen’s affiliation with bikes declined sharply 
in the 1950’s and 60’s when motorized transportation became more affordable and comprehensively 
available. This trend continued until the 1970’s when the share of bikes in the overall transportation 
landscape of Copenhagen dropped to 10% (Goodyear, 2012). 
30
However, landscape-level dynamics in the form of the Oil Crisis of 1973 prompted the national 
government to consider energy security, which translated at municipal level into a renewed interest in 
encouraging bicycle usage. This prompted a gradual break away from the dominant regime technology of 
automobiles, which were widely and inexpensively accessible at the time. In the 1990s, government 
departments contracted the private sector to begin monitoring citizens’ transport behaviors so as to target 
regime-level dynamics by tailoring transport policy that favored bicycle usage to citizens’ needs. This was 
accompanied by supply-side factors such as adequate infrastructure policy, construction and maintenance 
to allow for the smooth uptake of bicycles. At the niche level, grassroots organizations such as the Danish 
Cycling Federation and the Cycling Embassy of Denmark helped to create new markets and extend the 
stakeholder network, thereby facilitating convergence between macro-, meso- and micro-level 
stakeholders and dynamics. The relationships between stakeholders at the three levels have since been 
embedded in consistent and expected roles, which have helped to secure the legitimacy of the new 
sociotechnical system. For example, government agencies set targets, develop and fund bicycle strategies; 
the private sector (eg. Copenhagenize Consulting) consistently monitors and evaluates bicycle-friendly 
cities; and non-governmental actors facilitate public participation and network formation. 
Although the Dutch have maintained a similarly longstanding cycling culture, the transition process in 
Utrecht was slightly different to that of Copenhagen’s. This could be due to the difference in landscape 
pressures which prompted regime change: Dijk et al. (2020) notes that the Netherlands has been slow to 
promote renewable energy policies to facilitate energy security in comparison with Denmark and Norway. 
Indeed, concern for the rising number of car-bicycle accidents in the 1970s after a prolonged period of 
decreased bicycle usage is cited as the main landscape pressure pushing for regime change (Basu, n.d.). 
Ensuing government intervention lead to a more bicycle-driven approach to transportation, with the 
‘Masterplan Fiets’ (Bike Masterplan) in the 1990s being the biggest boast to municipal cycle policy (van 
Goeverden and Godefrooij, 2010). The Masterplan’s objective was to have a safer environment for 
cyclists, as the number of casualties remained significant up until the 1990s. Policy efforts focused on 
regime-level factors associated with safety such as changing motorist behavior, road layout and traffic 
systems. This entailed coordinated policy efforts at the national, provincial and municipal levels to 
stimulate demand and supply mechanisms for the transition to safer cycling environments. Further 
regime-level efforts extended to creating a hierarchical traffic order which prioritized bicycles above 
public transport and cars; and the suggestion of a car-free city center in 2020. At the niche level, multiple 
organizations were involved in creating demand for the transition towards bicycles through policy 
promotion, including health insurance providers, schools, transport companies, retailers and the media. A 
democratic city discussion was also held in 2015 to involve the general public in formulating an action 
plan to create a cyclist-friendly city, coinciding with the “window of opportunity” presented by the Tour 
De France in 2015 to make Utrecht a “world cycle city”. In the case of Utrecht, government roles are 
clearly defined, however there remains room to consolidate the roles of other non-governmental and 
private actors in facilitating the system transition. 
The MLP can be further supplemented by the Policy Arrangements Approach (PAA), which focuses on 
the content and structure of policy domains that help to stabilize new sociotechnical regimes (Paredis, 
2011). It links the mechanisms of sociotechnical change as exemplified in the MLP to everyday policy 
processes related to several key elements: actors and actors’ coalitions, resources, rules and discourse 
(Paredis, 2011). In the case of Copenhagen, policy processes for the transition towards bike-centered
mobility emerged in the form of a coalition of actors from different sectors and levels of governance, 
their resources and capabilities, and common goals feeding into policy formulation, monitoring, 
evaluation and implementation. These practices became embedded in the policy domain, leading to 
further consolidation of the new regime. In the case of Utrecht, bike-centered mobility policy processes 
largely remain the responsibility of the public sector, with the main actors being the national and 
31
municipal governments. Other stakeholders such as health insurance providers, schools, private 
companies and the media were mostly involved in the implementation stage of the policy process. 
Cities 
In order to coherently analyze the two cities, the stakeholders that play an important part in both 
Copenhagen and Utrecht must be outlined; a map of current bicycle-centered policy objectives must be 
drawn; and future objectives must be identified. 
Copenhagen 
Stakeholder Analysis 
Numerous actors are invested in the goal to make Copenhagen the world’s most bicycle-friendly city (The 
City of Copenhagen, 2011). In the field of bicycle transportation policy in Copenhagen, the city’s Roads 
and Parks Department (CRPD) can be identified as the main stakeholder (Centre for Public Impact, 
2016). In principle it is the CRPD that sets targets for the construction of new bicycle infrastructure and 
is responsible for the planning and creation of viable strategies to fund and develop the city’s bicycle 
strategy, which is then developed by the Technical and Environmental Administration Traffic 
Department (The City of Copenhagen, 2011). Next to these local government actors, the DCF and the 
Cycling Embassy of Denmark (CED) - a network organization that is comprised of public and private 
stakeholders in the transportation sector (Cycling Embassy of Denmark, 2020) - are actively involved in 
the creation of the city’s bicycle strategy. In terms of evaluation of past policies, Copenhagen’s 
government has collaborated closely with Copenhagenize Consulting, a private consultancy that actively 
monitors the development of cycling in cities, and which created the Copenhagenize Ranking of cities 
across the globe based on their bicycle friendliness. 
Political and Public Support 
The local and national governments in Denmark have consistently supported and encouraged cycling 
(Centre for Public Impact, 2016). Due to consistent monitoring of citizens’ transport behavior since 1995, 
different stakeholders were able to formulate evidence-based policy goals in the two bicycle strategies 
which have been implemented to date. The inclusion of non-governmental actors at the formulation stage 
(DCF and CED) and the evaluation stage (Copenhagenize Consulting) of the policy cycle has actively led 
to a sound foundation for bicycle-centered policy (Centre for Public Impact, 2016). 
Current State of Policy 
Copenhagen has actively monitored the transport behavior of citizens since 1995 and released its first 
bicycle account in 1996. These accounts have since been published on a bi-annual basis and in 2002 were 
accompanied by Copenhagen’s first bicycle strategy. Whilst the 1996 bicycle report defined 10 indicators 
according to which the city’s bicycle friendliness was to be evaluated, the city’s 2000-2003 budget formally 
outlined the goal for a clear bicycle strategy by stating: 
“An overall action plan for the improvement of cycling conditions shall be drawn up. The plan shall 
contain provisions for the extension of the cycle track network and proposals for new cycle routes and 
include proposals for the improvement of general passability, cyclist safety and comfort, including 
necessary maintenance.” (City of Copenhagen, Budget 2000-20031
)
 
1 Cited in (City of Copenhagen, Building and Construction Administration, Roads and Parks Department, July 2002)
32
The bicycle strategies of 2002 and 2015 followed up on the indicators defined in 1996 and outlined a 
coherent and comprehensive set of targets to be achieved by the end of the proposed strategy. These 
were clearly built on the aims defined in the previous policy and have in many cases replaced the 2010 
goals with more ambitious targets for 2025. 
Goals of Bicycle Policy 
Like its 2002 predecessor, Copenhagen’s current bicycle policy defines 9 areas of focus2
: 
1. Cycle tracks and reinforced cycle lanes 
2. Green cycle routes 
3. Improved cycling conditions in the City Centre 
4. Combing cycling and public transport 
5. Bicycle parking 
6. Improved signal intersections 
7. Better cycle track maintenance 
8. Better cycle track cleaning 
9. Campaigns and information 
For each, clear strategies and indicators were defined, and bi-annual reports were published measuring 
their development. The state of development was taken into account for the defining of new policy goals 
and was streamlined with the city’s Climate Plan (Copenhagen Climate Plan, 2009) transport objective. 
The focus on bicycles is consistent across multiple fields of policy such as transport, health and climate 
(The City of Copenhagen, 2011). 
Utrecht 
Stakeholder analysis 
Many stakeholders in the Netherlands are involved in shaping current bicycle policy, including “the 
national government, provinces and municipalities as well as non-governmental stakeholders (such as the 
Traffic and Transport Infrastructure department for promotion of the policy). Stakeholders such as 
health insurance providers, schools, transport companies, retailers and the media are also involved in 
promotion of the policy” (Basu, n.d.). 
The national government has shaped bicycle policy in the Netherlands for the past 30 years, and as such, 
is arguably the most important stakeholder. The government sets national policy for all other stakeholders 
follows; however, it is not responsible for funding all bicycle projects, as this role is delegated to the 
municipalities. Provinces manage the cycling roads that connect cities together and create cycle routes 
throughout the Netherlands. Additionally, they fund larger projects within municipalities and create a 
space for cycling within the larger transportation system. Another strong actor is the municipality, which 
is the main unit of analysis of this paper. Municipalities have specified budget allocations for bicycle 
projects and implement goals related to creating bicycle-friendly cities (Dutch Cycling Embassy, 2016, p. 
11). 
Current State of Policy 
Utrecht’s bicycle policy rapidly changed after the Tour de France began in the city in 2015; this is cited as 
a significant driver for making Utrecht the ‘world cycle city’ (wereldfietsstad) (Gemeente Utrecht, 2015, p. 
8). The position of Utrecht on the Copenhagenize Index - third place in 2019 and second place in 2018 -
arguably shows that their cycling strategy has been effective. Indeed, cycling is a top priority for a fast-
 
2
(The City of Copenhagen, 2011, p. 21)
33
growing city like Utrecht and plays a key part in an even broader Municipal strategy, ‘Utrecht 
Aantrekkelijk en Bereikbaar 2030’ (Utrecht: Attractive and Reachable 2030). This strategy states that with 
population growth and the city being located in the center of the Netherlands, an improvement in bicycle 
mobility is needed if the city is to prevent congestion and improve urban quality of life (Gemeente 
Utrecht, 2012). For example, one argument in favor of more bicycles in the inner city is that this 
facilitates a livelier atmosphere. This ties cycling directly to the local economy, encouraging people to use 
their bikes to go to work, and promoting bicycles as a healthy alternative to cars. Furthermore, the city 
proposed a hierarchical order in which traffic should be organized, placing the bike first, then public 
transport, and only then the car. This same order is applied at traffic lights and crossroads, where cyclists 
typically had to wait longer than cars, creating bicycle congestion and irritation due to slower cycling flows
in the city (Gemeente Utrecht, 2015). This flow makes cycling a more attractive alternative to driving, as
people know that travelling by bike allows them to reach their destinations more quickly, and gives them a 
healthier, greener lifestyle alternative. Furthermore, in 2020, the proposition was made to create car-free 
city center: there will be enough car parking spaces in a ring around the city to encourage people to take 
easily-accessible public transport or to rent a city bike to traverse around the city (Fietsberaad Crow, 
2020). 
Goals of Bicycle Policy 
In the current version of Utrecht: Attractive and Reachable 2030, six goals were identified that aim to
make bicycles the primary mode of transportation by 2030 (Gemeente Utrecht, 2015, pp. 4-5): 
 Bicycle routes and bicycle lanes 
 Traffic lights and traffic flow 
 Traffic operations and detours 
 Traffic safety and bicycle behaviour 
 Bicycle parking and enforcement 
 Bicycle economy 
These six indicators broadly outline the overall 2030 strategy, and do not necessarily build on any other
policy basis than transportation policies. The approach Utrecht is taking is broad, working within 
guidelines that are designed to help implement these goals, but these are by no means fully formulated 
(Gemeente Utrecht, 2015). 
Analysis
The literature on system building activities to facilitate systemic change, exemplified by the underlying 
transition towards a more bicycle-centered mobility, emphasizes that significant socio-cultural changes 
and legislative adjustments are needed (Planko et al., 2016). It identifies two main justifications for policy 
interventions: market failures and system failures (Jacobssen and Bergek, 2011). The latter arose from the 
innovation system literature and applies a more systemic, outside-in perspective (Planko et al., 2016). 
Klein and Woolthuis (2005) identified four broad system failures related to structural components: 
infrastructural failures (e.g. roads and technology), institutional failures (e.g. laws and values), interaction 
failures related to networks, and capabilities failures. In order to address the failures that hamper systemic 
change, targeted and tailored policy interventions and system building activities related to several subfunctions and processes of a system are needed. Here, the technological innovation system literature 
refers to seven sub-functions (Jacobssen and Bergek, 2011): as not all can be applied in this case, this 
paper’s analysis will focus specifically on the processes of resource mobilization, market formation and 
legitimation.
34
Policies to promote the resource mobilization sub-process focus on mitigating actor weaknesses related to 
how and when actors deploy their resources and whether their resources are adequate (Jacobsen and 
Bergek, 2011). Examples of this in the two case studies include how a multitude of actors are involved in 
the policy process, each contributing a role according to their appropriate resources. In Utrecht, the 
public sector dominates the policy formulation and funding processes, whilst the plural and private 
sectors are responsible for implementation and the dissemination of knowledge. In Copenhagen, a similar 
approach is adopted, whereby the private sector and public sectors are involved in monitoring and 
evaluation and policy formulation, whilst the plural sector act as intermediaries in disseminating 
information to the general public and representing public interests in the bicycle-centered mobility policy 
agenda. Such a multi-stakeholder approach promotes a more efficient and effective mobilization of 
resources towards the transition than any one sector’s efforts likely could; hence, systems failures related 
to actor weaknesses and interaction failures are mitigated by active stakeholder alignment efforts of the 
local government. However, some resources remain untapped; for example, Denmark is home to the 
Federation of Danish Motorists whose purpose is to protect the rights of motorists on the road (FDM, 
n.d.), and could make for an important stakeholder in the transition network. Although their purpose is 
undoubtedly linked to the transition from car-centered to bike-centered mobility in Copenhagen, the 
Federation’s potential resources (such as their unique membership and audience) is not integrated in the 
policy making process. In Utrecht, the policy formulation process could also benefit from untapped 
resources outside of the public sector, as is exemplified by the case of Copenhagen’s integration of the 
private sector into monitoring and evaluation practices. 
According to Planko et al. (2016), market formation is characterized by the creation of niche markets 
through a process of regulatory and legislative changes, as well as adaptation of business models and 
improved consumer awareness and behavior. These processes are generally undermined by institutional 
failures such as lack of regulatory and legislative frameworks, uncertainty of funding, and lack of 
standards and coordination (Jacobsen and Bergek, 2011). In traditional economic theory, markets also 
emerge due to mutual (but not necessarily simultaneous) causality between technology-push and demandpull mechanisms (Choi, 2017). Many of the policy instruments and policy goals related to bicycle-centered 
mobility in Copenhagen and Utrecht focus on improving demand-side factors for the easy uptake of 
bicycles in both cities. These are mostly related to enhanced infrastructure; however, also extend to 
engaging stakeholders to educate the general public about transition efforts for bicycle-centered mobility. 
Planko et.al (2016) argues that this is important for ameliorating consumers’ selective perception and 
lock-in behaviors. In the case of Utrecht, consumer awareness efforts are supplemented by further 
demand-side mechanisms such as a traffic hierarchy that prioritizes bikes on the road above cars. In 
Copenhagen, bicycle policy is consistently monitored and tailored to citizens’ needs, and grassroots 
organizations provide platforms for engaging the general public’s interests. Both of these cases represent 
the creation of hard (regulatory) and soft (social) institutional frameworks that allow for the bicycle 
market to flourish. These could be complemented by further supply-side policy efforts. 
Finally, the social acceptance of and compliance with such hard and soft institutions for bicycle-centered 
mobility in Utrecht and Copenhagen reflects the legitimacy of the bicycle regime. This could be 
destabilized by incomplete networks or the absence of networks altogether (Jacobsen and Bergek, 2011); 
however, the municipal authorities’ efforts to align a multiplicity of stakeholders from the public, private 
and plural sectors towards their cause created strong networks that worked to facilitate the transition. The 
local governments’ system building approaches were successful in facilitating the societal transition to and 
legitimacy of bicycle-centered mobility in both cases. 
35
Policy proposals 
Based on the above provided analysis, we are now proposing three different policies aiming to further 
improve the current situation and foster the speed of the transition in both cities. These approaches can 
be simultaneously used in other cities as well. Yet, dependent on the stage of development and structural 
circumstances, the efficaciousness can vary. 
Increased parking space prices 
To dissuade people bringing their cars into the city centre, a simple and effective measurement that could 
be taken, is raising the parking ticket prices. This is a short-term action that can be easily undertaken by 
the local authorities. Examples from other cities have shown positive changes by decreased traffic and 
therefore less polluted city centres as a result. Increased prices can generally be seen as a first step in the 
process of creating a more bike-friendly city that also allows for better vehicle flow, especially in areas that 
were originally not designed for cars, like historical city centres. By decreasing the amount of spaces 
available and by offering only parking spots to residents of the area in further steps, the incentives to park 
outside the city and use public transportation to get into the city centre are increased. 
Commuter card 
In order to facilitate the growth of sustainable means of transportation we suggest the creation of a 
Commuter Card. This card, designed in a similar fashion to the Dutch OV-Chipkaart, should enable 
commuters to utilise public transportation, be it in form of trains, trams or busses, to commute from their 
homes to the cities and working places in a more cost-efficient and relaxing way. Within the cities, owner 
of these commuter cars should then free access to bicycle parking and rent city-bikes cheaply. By offering 
an entry point for commuters into the local and sustainable transport system, the overall number of cars 
in the cities could be reduced while the bicycle share of inner-city transportation will be increased.
These Commuter cards could be funded through a public-private partnership, for example between 
municipalities and employing companies, in which the state could cover part of the cost while the 
employers would be encouraged to cover the remaining share of the cost. In order to make this system 
attractive to local employers, certifications for companies that encourage sustainable transportation and 
therefore appeal corporate social responsibility will be handed out.
Digital platform 
The third and last recommendation does not only provide solutions, how transition can be managed more 
efficiently. It further adds a policy goal to the currently existing bicycle strategies which has been 
addressed neither in Copenhagen nor in Utrecht, the circularity of the bicycle market and economy.
Both, Copenhagen and Utrecht have many students and internationals resulting in a brisk change within 
the cities and therefore with constant procurement and demand for bicycles, especially second-hand 
bikes. These bikes are mostly sold on the informal market at platforms like Facebook and eBay, resulting 
in a huge uncertainty about the quality and durability of these bikes.
To remove these uncertainties, extend the lifecycle of bicycles and reduce waste, we propose the creation 
of a digital platform, hosted by local authorities. This platform connects users, such as students and new 
residents, with suppliers, such as other students and bike shops, as well as repair stores carrying out 
maintenance and reparations to increase the quality of the products.
36
Conclusion 
This paper has analyzed the policy processes of the transition towards a bicycle-centered mobility in two 
of the most bike-friendly cities in the world, Copenhagen and Utrecht. Both cities have a long cycling 
tradition; however, they have used two different approaches to manage the transition. While in Utrecht, 
change was driven mainly by governmental actors and State institutions, both at local and national level, a
broader set of actors, including societal organizations, collaborated in policymaking in Copenhagen. A 
coherent set of policy goals has been generated in both cities by the elaboration of major strategies to 
make cities more bicycle friendly. In Copenhagen, these goals are connected to well suited and consistent 
policy instruments. These instruments and the progress in achieving the outlined goals is consistently 
tracked with a set of indicators in bi-annual reports. Comparably in Utrecht, goals and strategies 
formulated in the ‘Masterplan fiets’ serve as broader guidelines and lack of consistent policy instruments 
and measures to achieve them. Although Copenhagen and Utrecht are amongst the most bicycle-friendly 
cities in the world, there is still room for improvement to further foster and speed up the transition 
towards bike-centered mobility. Therefore, we formulated three policy recommendations providing 
additional measures complementary to and consistent with the already existing policy instruments. 
Introduction
“Energy is central to nearly every major challenge and opportunity the world faces today.
Be it for jobs, security, climate change, food production, or increasing incomes,
access to energy for all is essential”
(United Nations, 2018).
According to the United Nations, energy is the main tool that drives the world and is an important 
catalyzer of economic growth and social development; but it is also the main environmental pain. For 
many years, non-renewable energies have been the main source of power. In 1968, oil, gas, coal, and 
uranium (nuclear energy) accounted for 94% of the world’s energy consumption and fifty years later they 
still play an important role in many countries around the world. Actually, in 2018, they represented 89% 
of the consumption worldwide but non-renewables reserves are decreasing (Ritchie & Roser, 2015). So 
far, considering current production and consumption, coal reserves are estimated to last around 132 years 
more, oil reserves around 50 years, and gas reserves 51 years (BP, 2019).
How can we maintain sustainable growth if one of our main inputs is non-sustainable? Moreover, fossil 
fuels have short-term and long-term impacts in the environment, being the primary source of carbon 
dioxide emissions (CO2), air and ocean pollution, and environmental destruction while extracting and 
processing. So, with no doubt, a change to a more sustainable and environmentally friendly energy source
is needed, and some countries have already begun this important transition. Between the major renewable 
energy sources, we can find solar, wind, hydro, and biopower; solar being the fastest growing in the last 
five years (Power Technology, 2020) due to a decrease in prices and political will (The Guardian, 2017).
One of the countries that have started to reduce its reliance on fossil fuels is Germany, using clean and 
renewable energy to generate power. Germany was the first European country with more renewable 
energy consumption in 2018 and the 6th in the world ranking, after China, USA, Brazil, Canada, and 
India; and regarding solar power, it is also the first in Europe and the 4th worldwide (BP, 2019).
The transition to greener energy sources in Germany started in 1991 and despite being one of the 
countries with fewer hours of sunshine, it is nowadays among the main producers of solar power. How 
could Germany achieve this important task? In this work, we will identify the main factors, policies, and 
opportunities that allow the rapid growth in Germany’s solar power capacity; as well as new policy 
recommendations that could foster this transition.
Theoretical framework
For addressing our question and to understand and analyse the transition of Germany into a more 
renewable energetic matrix we will use the policy mix perspective developed by Dijk et al., under the 
motivation that policies do not work in isolation. Particularly in the German case, a bunch of different 
instruments from the supply and the demand side were key aspects on the transition. So we will assess the 
policy instruments that were implemented since 1991 and how they interact with each other in order to 
allow the successful result (Dijk et al., 2020).
39
Furthermore, for the actor analysis in Chapter 5, a combination of different frameworks and theories 
have been used. Transition to a more sustainable energy system in Germany requires a socio-technical 
system transition. Therefore, the concept of the technological systems approach (TSA), which emphasizes 
the “networks of agents interacting in a specific technology area under a particular institutional 
infrastructure to generate, diffuse and utilize technology” (Carlsson and Stankiewicz, 1991; Carlsson, 
1997), will be used.
Moreover, the Actor-network theory (ANT) (Greenhalgh and Stones, 2010) has been used to map and 
explain relationships and interactions between actors and technologies, since ANT states that a network is 
made of people and technologies. In addition, the multi-level perspective (MLP) is also taken into account 
because of the socio-technical regime (Geels and Kemp, 2007), which allows us to map more sorts of 
actors such as users and policymakers (Geels and Kemp, 2007; Geels, 2004).
The Photovoltaic Module Technology
The idea of solar panels (or also Photovoltaics) was born from the ability of certain materials to produce 
electricity out of sunlight - “photovoltaic effect”, which was discovered in the far 1839. It followed with 
numerous research activities, and in 1954 the first commercially used solar panel was developed in the 
USA.
Today almost 3% (450 TWh) of global energy production (17.000 TWh) is produced using solar panels 
and this number grows annually (+100 TWh/year) (Our World in Data, 2020). The growth, reliability, 
and profitability of this technology mainly comes from its relatively cheap and non-complicated 
production. The main element in the solar panels is silicon, which is the second-most abundant element 
on Earth after oxygen and can be extracted from clay, silica sand, and rocks. The transformation of rough 
silicon into crystalline silicon used in panels is also an easy and well-known technology that does not 
require complicated infrastructure (Osanyinpeju, 2018).
One of the gaps in solar panels is their physical efficiency level - most of them are not exceeding the level 
of 25% efficiency. This means that from 100% of energy input (sunlight) each solar panel converts only 
25% into energy. To compare, the average coal energy efficiency is around 50%. But from an economic 
perspective, where “efficiency” is defined by ERoEI (Energy Returned on Energy Invested), solar energy 
efficiency is 4:1. This means that for each invested unit of resources into solar panels, 4 units coming as 
revenues and energy output of this panel. Although it shows the efficiency of solar energy, this is the 
lowest ERoEI of all energy sources, where coal is in a leading position with a score of 80:1 (Raugei et al, 
2017). In order to increase the efficiency of solar energy, multiple R&D activities are conducted around 
the world. The most promising one is the recent discovery from Australia, where the physical efficiency 
of a solar panel reached 40%. This value may largely increase the ERoEI of solar energy in the future (Da 
Silva, 2016).
Being an efficient and sustainable source of power, the solar energy sector has rapidly expanded since 
2000. Around 26% of the world’s solar panels are located in Europe, where France, Germany, and the 
United Kingdom are among the top 10 world producers of solar energy. Today, the turnover in the solar 
Photovoltaic (PV) industry in Europe amounted to 14,5 billion Euros (Longman, 2017).
One of the leading countries in the world and in Europe in the area of solar energy is Germany. This 
paper will examine Germany’s case closer to investigate the local context of PV technology. Germany is a 
good example to investigate due to the amount of data and literature.
40
The first movement towards PV industry development started from the number of investments in 1991. 
By 2004 Germany reached the threshold of productivity of 1 GW and since then the cumulative capacity 
was growing faster each year (Wirth, 2020). One of the important policy-factors that affected this growth 
was the Renewable Energy Sources Act (Germ. - EEG). This act encouraged businesses to support 
renewable energy transition and channel investments. A variety of mechanisms was used, like production 
tax credits, renewable portfolio standards, and improved auctions. The EEG played a crucial role in the 
transition, decreasing the price per kW from 5000 Euro in 2006, to 1300 Euros in 2015. For a consumer, 
the price for kWh is 3.6 Eurocents (BMWi, 2015).
Today almost 10% of Germany’s energy production is provided by PV technology. The overall number 
of 1.58 million of solar panels jointly produces over 41 GW. In 2016, the amount of money invested in 
further development of PV systems was 1.58 billion Euros, and by 2020 the net value of the PV market in 
Germany reached 176 billion Euros (Wirth, 2020).
Solar energy as part of a renewable energy source is regulated by the list of institutions that govern and 
oversee the energy-production sector of Germany. Germany is a federal republic, therefore in each of 16 
federal lands (Germ. - Bundesland), the local government is responsible for its PV infrastructure, as well as 
for local transition policies. Still, major decisions are made by the federal government. The Federal 
Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Posts, and Railway (BNetzA) is mostly 
responsible for the regulation of the PV industry, prevents monopolies, and ensures effective cooperation 
between the producers, the state and the consumers. The Federal Ministry of Economics & Technologies 
(BMWi) and the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU) 
are the main governing bodies on a federal level. The BMWi is responsible for Germany’s energy 
infrastructure: the supply, efficiency, and grids. The BMU is responsible for renewable sources of energy 
production, environmental protection, and nuclear safety (TERI-KAS, 2017).
During the implementation of PV technology in Germany and establishing a reliable source of energy, a 
number of policies were implemented on different levels. The next section will take a closer look at the 
policy actions which supported Germany’s energy transition.
Policy Analysis
Government policies had, without any doubt, a key role in the diffusion and creation of more efficient 
PV technologies in Germany. Different policy instruments, put in place since the 90s, helped Germany to 
catch-up world leaders in PV global market share, taking the country’s consumption to the top 5 of the 
world today. Several authors have highlighted the importance of the comprehensive German policy mix 
put in place, leveraging on different incentives to promote the diffusion of PV technologies, and 
exploiting efficiently preconditioned and synergetic linkages along the different stages of the policy mix as 
we can appreciate in Table 1. Among the main policy instruments, we can find:
1,000 roofs program
PV solar panels were a niche market by the start of the 90’s decade. It was not only a more costly 
alternative for power generation in comparison to traditional energy sources but also a technology with a 
high degree of novelty that needed to be proven effective before thinking of a higher adoption, especially 
from households. Therefore, the German government established in 1991 the 1,000 roofs program for 
promoting the installation of new PV capacities, with a strong investment subsidy of 70%. The program 
was proven effective to provide a market of experience with PV installations, develop knowledge for new 
41
housing projects to meet the requirements for PV generation and to stimulate the solar power usage on 
the consumer front. The program was so successful that during the five years of implementation (1991 –
1995) they doubled the target of roof installations in Germany, reaching a 4MWp installed capacity 
(Chowdhury et al., 2014).
The Act on Supplying Electricity from Renewables – Stromeinspeisungsgesetz (StrEG)
The StrEG, enacted in 1990, was the first official law in Germany to provide support for the 
development of renewable energies. The StrEG was a framework to enable the purchase of electricity 
generated through different renewable energies such as solar, wind, hydro, landfill, and sewage gas, among 
others. It also set the foundations of Feed-in-tariffs (FIT) remunerations that would be later a key 
component of the success of the German policy mix. The StrEG was targeted to powerplants with an 
installed capacity lower than 5MWp and with public ownership of electric utilities lower than 75% (to 
promote the engagement of new actors and make the initiative more inclusive). It helped to create a 
market by securing a share for renewable energies of 5% from the utilities’ requirements (Töpfer & 
Gawel, 2013).
Energy Feed-in Law
The law was enforced in 1991 is a second stage of the regulatory framework for promoting renewable 
energies after the StrEG. One of the key aspects of this law was to secure the access of PV solar 
installations to the electricity grid, paving the way towards a formal market of renewable energies and for 
incentive mechanisms such as feed-in tariffs (FIT). The FIT policy guaranteed a yearly fixed rate for 
producers of renewable energies that would be paid by the utilities in relation to the average revenue they 
perceived per unit of traditional energy. The FIT varied among the different sources of renewable energy 
and was established at 90% for the solar-powered electricity. Under this mechanism, operators of PV 
power plants would receive a secured price of 90% of the retail energy price for a period of 20 years, 
incentivizing the investment in more PV units. However, this mechanism had two main flaws. The first, 
due to the fluctuation of electricity retail prices as the base for calculating the FIT, financial institutions 
were discouraged from investing in long-term projects with such levels of volatility. On the other hand, it 
made grid operators prefer renewables with lower FIT percentages (such as hydro and biomass), leading 
PV energy to remain an unviable option for the mass market (Chowdhury et al., 2014; Töpfer & Gawel, 
2013).
Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz (EEG)
The EEG was enacted during the second trimester of the new millennium as the successor of the StrEG 
and the feed-in law that were into force during the past decade. Different from the previous FIT scheme, 
the EEG provided a fixed revenue to the owners of renewable power plants per energy unit produced 
based on production costs and inclusive of a significant margin of profit for a period of 20 years. The 
EEG introduced priority purchase obligation and remuneration by the closest grid operators and allowed 
all the energy produced to be sold in the open market, transferring the cost of the FIT scheme to the 
consumers. The difference between the market price at a given time and the fixed FIT rate allocated to 
the PV producers were charged to the consumer under the concept of “EEG levy” (TERI-KAS, 2017). A 
key characteristic of this revised FIT mechanism was an annual 5% degradation in the fixed rates offered 
to stimulate power plant operators to lower the costs and adopt more efficient technologies (Töpfer & 
Gawel, 2013).
42
The EEG Act also included a new “100,000 roofs” program that provided interest-free loans to all new 
PV installations up to capacity enhancement of 300MWp with an extremely competitive 10-year 
repayment scheme that included 2 years free of redemption (Chowdhury et al., 2014). The program had 
an ambitious budget of 695 million euros and was so successful that the funds were exhausted earlier than 
expected by June 2003 and, according to a later official report of the first EEG amendment in 2014, the 
300 MWp goal was achieved as well. As a consequence, the program was not extended, and the German 
government decided to focus on the FIT program as the only support policy for PV (and other 
renewables) adoption by offering additional premiums to producers (Töpfer & Gawel, 2013).
Since the introduction of the EEG Act in 2000, there have been several amendments to this policy that 
have been revised more frequently than expected due to the dynamics of the industry and the rapid 
adoption of new technologies. These modifications introduced changes to the FIT scheme (recently 
replaced by an auction system for installations over 750 kW), set up goals for renewable energies share in 
electricity and established a “deployment corridor” that specifies how much renewables capacity should 
be installed per year to achieve the renewable targets (TERI-KAS, 2017).
43
44
Actors
This chapter lists, maps and explains the relevant actors in Germany of the solar power energy sector and 
their interactions using the frameworks as mentioned in Chapter 2; the TSA, ANT and MLP.
This chapter starts by showing two tables; table 2 shows the relevant actors identified.
Table 3 shows whether the actors can be categorized in the micro-, meso- or macro-level.
45
46
47
Since actor-networks are dynamic and considered inherently unstable, a stabilized factor is needed to align the 
actors (Greenhalgh and Stones, 2010). Hence, the global strategy of achieving the energy transition where 
solar power functions as a major technology can function as a factor that aligns the actors mentioned in table 
1 since they all play a part in the energy transition using solar power.
Citizens, consumers, users
To successfully manage energy transition, the acceptance and support of German citizens are needed 
(Kalkbrenner and Roosen, 2016). If they accept and support the PVs for solar energy, the consumer will 
adopt the PV technology and therefore become a user. The national transition energy is decentralised in 
Germany, therefore civil society for transformations towards an environmentally friendly energy system in 
48
countries is important (Kalbrenner and Roosen, 2016). Furthermore, according to the research of 
Kalkbrenner and Roosen (2016), the factors that play the most important role in the willingness to participate 
in adopting renewable energy are social norms and trust, followed by environmental concern and higher 
income. This shows that social aspects are important for the energy transition, so a socio-technical transition 
is needed.
PV consumer demand has risen since prices of solar panels have fallen and a product range has broadened. 
Recent numbers show that in 2018 up to 1 million German households extract their energy from solar power 
(Karry, 2018). However, a recent developed is taking place regarding electricity storage. Germany has 120,000 
households that installed solar units combined with battery storage, for electricity production and storage 
(Webb, 2019). Hence, battery storage and local grid systems combined with PVs have become important 
technologies that need to be further developed and diffused (Hockends, 2019; Webb, 2019; Cooke, 2019). 
These technologies are growing in popularity since numbers show that the amount of solar energy storage 
installations doubled since 2015 amongst German households (Karry, 2018), and more than 40 businesses in 
Germany are currently involved in this combined unit sector (Cooke, 2019).
Key relationships and interaction between actors
As explained in chapter 3, the role of the German federal government, which includes the BNetzA, BMWi, 
and BMU, is to regulate and facilitate the environment for the solar power market, in which businesses & 
operators, communities & associations, research institutions and technologies act and interact, and where the 
regional authorities – the Bundesländer – are responsible for the local energy transition policy and the PV 
infrastructure (TERI-KAS, 2017).
Businesses and Operators are firms and producers, electricity utilities, and the innovators of solar power 
technology. Firms, producers, and utilities are suppliers of solar energy and solar panels for electricity 
(Fraunhofer ISE, 2020).
The federal ministries and local authorities have the power to promote and incentivize the transition from 
non-renewable energy to renewable energy coming from solar power with e.g. PVs, and also storing this 
energy, by making investment decisions and providing benefits for PV users and producers (Fraunhofer ISE, 
2020, p. 77). Hence, the interaction between the federal institutions, their policymakers, and the businesses 
are important.
The federal government changed the dynamics of the energy market by introducing the Energy Feed-in Law -
1991. Public utilities began to purchase renewable energy from solar, among other renewables. However, this 
solar power stayed unviable (TERI-KAS, 2017). Hence, the EEG introduced in 2000, brought some change. 
The EEG brought a fixed tariff over a 20 years period for every renewable energy generated. The 
government was also able to offer low-interest loans for PV installations below 300 MWp (TERI-KAS, 2017). 
With this, the government made citizens potential users of solar power, since they are able to generate their 
own electricity with PVs. With this the government took the role of an active promoter and citizens became 
consumers and active users. This is a way of facilitating a socio-technical transition.
The government providing a low-interest loan also provides the opportunity for solar power businesses and 
PV producers to grow and it stimulates the diffusion of solar power technology.
49
Looking at local authorities, it shows that public utilities can be owned by municipalities (TERI-KAS, 2017). 
Hence, municipalities can use this advantage to achieve renewable energy goals since they have a say in 
regional renewable electricity. Meaning that they can actively promote the energy transition among potential 
users. Making the relationship between municipalities, public utilities, and users significant for the sociotechnical transition.
Research institutes and universities are funded by federal ministries (Braun, 2019). They depend on this 
funding for R&D, Germany also depends on R&D for the energy transition. Therefore, this relationship can 
be seen as interdependent.
R&D of research institutions is also important for businesses & operators and vice versa since businesses & 
operators are able to commercialize the R&D of research institutions (Braun, 2019). They both cause new 
technologies into the energy market that contributes to the energy transition.
The German Renewable Energy Act in 2000, boosted solar power energy. Between 2008 and 2013 investors 
wanted to capture the benefits of this large-scale technology, causing rapid growth of solar energy producers 
and service companies (Wehrmann, 2020). This made Germany one of the world leaders in that time in the 
field of solar power. One of the three largest solar panel producers in the world was a German company 
called SolarWorld. However, Germany had a tough time competing with China since China offered solar 
panels at a cheaper rate. It even caused the fall of SolarWorld, this was caused by investors changing 
investments from Germany to China to maximize returns since China produces at a much cheaper rate 
(Wehrmann, 2020).
Another interesting interaction is between large firms and German companies specialised in combined units; 
PVs and battery storage. Giants such as Shell have bought Sonnen, which was the leading supplier of home 
storage batteries. Power company EON – another German leading renewable company - and Solarwatt are 
cooperating. Furthermore, EnBW, which is one of the four large German utility companies, purchased Senec, 
also a supplier of battery storage (Cooke, 2019). This all shows that large firms are getting a hint of the 
growing German market of battery storage.
Besides the relationship between the actors, the interaction level is determined. Table 4 shows at what level 
the actors mostly interact with each other.
50
51
Policy Recommendations
The German solar power sector is already well developed but had its ups and downs (Wehrmann, 2020). Past 
years have shown that Germany also faces challenges in the solar power sector due to foreign players, such as 
China (Thompson, 2015). Germany has also shown that R&D activities, cooperation and knowledge flows 
between German firms, research institutions, universities and foreign technologies can be enhanced, as well as 
the development of infrastructure. Hence, the recommendations below are mainly focused on improving 
these aspects.
Recommendation 1: Matchmaking with research institutions
As it was indicated in Chapter 1 of this paper, there are recent improvements in enhancing the output of solar 
panels. Still, most of those R&D activities are made outside Germany, for example in Australia. In the case of 
Australia, the lab that made this breakthrough is struggling with financing and looking for investments (da 
Silva, 2016).
It is crucial to engage in cooperation or partnerships with research institutions overseas that are making 
progress in solar energy efficiency. The Australian case is an example, but there are many other companies 
looking for foreign investment to conduct their research, like Sub-Saharan Africa and companies in China 
(Tsagas, 2019). Therefore, it is recommended to invest or provide grant funding to related projects or 
institutions.
That kind of cooperation and partnership agreements will not only increase knowledge flows from other 
countries into Germany but will also develop a network of reliable partners.
Recommendation 2: Subsidize R&D cooperation for battery storage and local grids.
From what is explained in Chapter 5 regarding citizens, consumers, users, and large firms purchasing smaller 
firms specialised in battery storage, shows that supporting the R&D infrastructure for solar energy battery 
storage could be a leading path for Germany.
Germany once had a booming solar panel production market to provide solar panels to consumers to 
contribute to the diffusion of PVs. However, foreign competition has led to a significant decrease in solar 
panel production in Germany. Leading to a decline in domestic investments and domestic purchase by 
consumers.
Nevertheless, the issue of generating too much solar energy by PVs of households is leading to new 
opportunities for Germany, namely the development of battery storage technology. Germany can enhance 
this technology by providing the right R&D environment for firms, research institutions, and universities.
Therefore, the recommendation is to provide subsidies for R&D when firms and research institutions or 
universities cooperate to develop the technology of battery storage or local grid projects. This provides an 
incentive to cooperate and stimulate open innovation. Thereby, from the firms’ side, cooperation with 
research institutions and/ or universities will provide more knowledge, and from the research institutions’ 
52
and universities’ perspective, cooperation with firms can help to commercialise new innovations (Kuhlmann 
and Ordóñez-Matamoros, 2017).
Recommendation 3: Capacity
Germany has an ambitious goal of increasing the share of renewable energy to 65% by 2030 and to phase out 
coal power by 2038. Thus, additional installed capacity for PV power will be required (International Energy 
Agency, 2020) and solar parks and solar roofs systems should increase in a large scale. Although current levels 
of support through the FIT program will be needed in the short term (Weiss, 2014) to foster the 
implementation of both technologies, the government should start thinking in promoting also subsidy-free 
business models in the medium and long term, to reduce the energy prices that are nearly among the highest 
around the world.
Recommendation 4: Developing promotion economic incentives for higher efficiency and related services
During the last decade, several key German manufacturers of PV panels have been displaced out of their 
national market due to cheaper alternative panels produced in China. Companies such as SolarWorld, Solon 
and Q-cells filled for insolvency and warned that the German PV industry would be close to collapse due to 
unfair dumping practices by Chinese manufacturers whom, at the same time, have managed to find ways 
around the antidumping tariffs imposed by the EU through opening subsidiaries in neighbouring countries 
(Clean Energy Wire, 2017). However, the German PV industry – once at the cutting-edge of PV technology -
could resurge with the right incentives if production or purchase subsidy schemes that reward development 
of more efficient PV panels are enforced. This way, the German industry could be incentivized to position in 
a more efficient niche market that brings higher environmental returns and is more attractive to corporate 
buyers. Incentives for related services, such as maintenance and development of storage capacity could be 
feasible alternatives as well for providing German PV players a second opportunity.
Conclusion
Using a combination of different frameworks and theories allowed us to analyse Germany’s solar power 
energy sector. We have found that Germany has a well-developed solar energy market compared to other 
countries. However, to achieve their ambitious goals the R&D sector needs further development and the 
solar power energy technology needs to grow more efficiently in order to diffuse this technology to achieve a 
sustainable energy transition. Hence, chapter has outlined four recommendations that can bring Germany a 
step closer to their ambitious goals regarding the sustainable energy transition, where solar power plays a 
major role.
For a Wider Adoption of Smart Grids: The Case of Norway, by Christian Nota, Marie Gillet, 
Hamza Sayan
Christian Nota, Marie Gillet, Hamza Sayan
Introduction
The Paris Agreement aims to reinforce countries’ capabilities to tackle adverse effects of climate change 
(UNFCCC, n.d.). Norway has assertive climate goals and aims to reduce its GHG emissions at least by 40% 
of its 1990 emissions until 2030 and be a low-emission society by 2050 (Ministry of Climate and 
Environment, 2017). An energy transition is needed to limit GHG emissions, where the transition from fossil 
fuels to low-carbon solutions may have an important role. This can be achieved through technological 
progress in the area of renewable energy (Gielen et al., 2019). However, cost and availability of renewable 
energy like hydro, wind and solar power is the main problem, since this kind of energy is not always available 
due to daily and seasonal effects that cause intermittent power generation. At this point, Smart Grids can be a 
promising solution (Hossain et al., 2016).
Smart Grids are a key component of the strategies aimed at moving towards sustainable development and a 
future where the energy produced and consumed is sustainable. They are key drivers to shifting towards 
sustainable cities (SDG 11), as they are facilitators of integration of renewable energy sources and the 
electrification of transports (Masera et al., 2018). This paper analyses the development, diffusion and use of 
Smart Grids in the context of Norway, one of the leading countries in the use of renewable energy. Indeed, 
“RES (Renewable Energy Sources) account for close to 100% of Norway’s electricity generation” (Y. Wang 
et al., 2019). However, given the country’s commitment to fulfilling the European Renewables Directive, 67% 
of the total energy use should be based on renewable energy by the end of this year, which requires an 
increase in the consumption of renewable energy so as to substitute the use of fossil-fuels in the power 
system (ETP SmartGrids, 2016). For the purpose of this paper, the term ‘Smart Grid’ is defined as “an 
electricity network that can cost efficiently integrate the behaviour and actions of all users connected to it –
generators, consumers and those that do both – in order to ensure economically efficient, sustainable power 
system with low losses and high levels of quality and security of supply and safety” (EU Commission Task 
Force for Smart Grids, 2010).
This paper aims to formulate a policy framework for the government of Norway, institutions and bodies in 
charge of the research and implementation of smart grids in the country, as well as for producers and endusers of said technology to help the wider diffusion of our chosen eco-innovation: Smart Grids. In order to 
do so, the paper will be divided in 5 sections. Section 1 provides a detailed explanation of the theoretical 
framework that will be used to analyse the case of Norway, namely Technological Innovation Systems (TIS). 
Section 2 presents an overview of what Smart Grids are, how they work and how they differ from traditional 
electrical grids in terms of social and environmental sustainability advantages. Section 3 explores the case of 
Norway by mapping the relevant actors, describing the history of system building activities for Smart Grids, 
current policies around said technology, current levels of development of Smart Grids, and challenges the 
country still faces for a wider diffusion of this technology. Based on conclusions reached by the former 
sections, Section 4 provides a series of recommendations regarding the degree of supply chain change, 
organisational change, social innovation and wider institutional changes that are still needed for wider 
diffusion of Smart Grids at the country level. Section 5 will conclude the paper by summarising our findings 
and recommendations and outlining potential limitations of our analysis. 
57
Theoretical Framework
The theoretical framework used to examine the case of Smart Grids in Norway will be the Technological 
Innovation System (TIS). It takes “a systems approach for understanding the development, diffusion and use 
of new technologies”(Edsand, 2019). Indeed, we define a TIS focusing on a technology as a “network of 
agents interacting in the economic/industrial area under a particular institutional infrastructure and involved 
in the generation, diffusion, and utilisation of technology” (Carlsson & Stankiewicz, 1991), and this network 
can operate at the national, regional and sectoral levels. According to Jacobsson & Bergek (2011), a TIS is 
comprised of seven sub-processes:
1. Knowledge development and diffusion
2. Entrepreneurial experimentation
3. Influence on the direction of research
4. Resource mobilisation
5. Market formation 
6. Legitimation
7. Development of positive externalities
Using the TIS framework will provide us with a scheme of analysis for the case of Norway, so as to identify 
what the Smart Grid Innovation system is achieving and what are the barriers it currently faces (Figure 1). We 
will first define the focus of our TIS as the specific technology that is Smart Grids. We will then map all 
relevant players in the diffusion of Smart Grids at the country level and the functions of each player in 
enabling their research, development and diffusion. Finally, we will analyse how the functional pattern of this 
system is shaped through present inducement and blocking mechanisms (Bergek et al., 2008) and thus 
identify key policy issues that Norway has to overcome in order to enable a wider diffusion of Smart Grids. 
The main benefit of using the TIS framework in this report is, that “it focuses on what is actually achieved in 
the system, rather than on the structure of the system” (Bergek et al., 2008). It will also enable us to identify 
potential system failures or weaknesses, and is most suited for this paper, which seeks to understand the 
potential and constraints of Smart Grids in Norway. Indeed, the wider diffusion of this eco-innovation will 
require the collaboration of a multitude of suppliers and service providers who will be able to install, integrate 
and maintain larger-scale Smart grids across the whole country. 
SECTION 2: SMART GRIDS - A BACKGROUND
WHAT ARE SMART GRIDS AND HOW DO THEY WORK?
To define a Smart Grid, it is first necessary to understand what an electrical grid is: an electrical power system 
network, which is composed of a generating plant, transmission lines, substations and more which deliver 
electricity from the power plant to homes and businesses (Kehinde, n.d.). A Smart Grid is a modernization of 
the traditional electrical grid, a radical enhancement of how electricity is created and delivered. What makes 
the grid “Smart” is that the electrical grid has been computerized, moving from a one-way to a two-way 
communication network between the consumer and power supplier (Davis, 2017). 
HOW DO SMART GRIDS COMPARE TO TRADITIONAL ELECTRICAL GRIDS?
58
Traditional electricity grids are mainly characterised by the traditional energy meter, which “measures the 
amount of consumed energy by a building, and stores the consumption data such that it can be read later for 
the purpose of billing” (Ghazi Khamees Ali & Abdul Lateef Abdul Ridha, 2014). Besides being unable to 
make users aware of their high energy consumption, using traditional energy meters comes with a number of 
disadvantages: their low accuracy levels give faulty readings, they are exposed to electricity thefts, additional 
financial resources have to be used to employ workers to read values of consumed energy, they cannot limit 
the amount of consumed energy by the consumer or control the operation of building appliances, do not 
support remote connection and disconnection, and are not built for enabling end-users to provide their 
excess electricity to the utility grid (Ghazi Khamees Ali & Abdul Lateef Abdul Ridha, 2014). 
Smart Grids offer a few advantages for solving energy problems and enabling the transition towards 
sustainable development and smart cities when compared to the traditional grid. Javadi & Javadi (2010) 
outline five main benefits to using Smart Grids in comparison to traditional electrical grids. Firstly, the energy 
provision of Smart Grids is more reliable: it has few and brief outages, along with self-healing power systems, 
which use digital information, automated control and autonomous systems (Javadi & Javadi, 2010). Second, 
the constant monitoring process ascertains insecure situations, as “high cyber security is built into all systems 
and operations” (Javadi & Javadi, 2010). A third benefit is that Smart Grids lead to reduced energy 
consumption, controlling demand during peak hours, minimising losses and helping users manage their 
energy behaviour. Moreover, Smart Grids decrease the generation of electricity from non-environmentallyfriendly sources, which also stimulates the replacement of oil-powered vehicles with electric vehicles (Javadi 
& Javadi, 2010).A final benefit is that operation costs related to electricity are reduced, as “customers have 
pricing choices and access to energy information [and] entrepreneurs accelerate technology introduction into 
the generation, distribution, storage and coordination of energy” (Javadi & Javadi, 2010).
Another advantage of implementing Smart Grids over traditional utility grids is a “better support for 
bidirectional energy flow, where implementing smart grids contributes to acquiring a better understanding of 
the value of renewable resources of energy […] because using these resources instead of the traditional 
resources helps in providing the energy from the consumers to the utility grids” (Ghazi Khamees Ali & 
Abdul Lateef Abdul Ridha, 2014). 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS TO DIFFUSION
We identify two main categories of barriers to the implementation and diffusion of Smart Grids: nontechnical challenges and changes in the power system value chain. First, non-technical challenges such as 
public concerns should not be ignored, as public acceptance or non-acceptance of related technologies have a 
strong influence on the diffusion of Smart Grids (and emerging technologies in general). Within this category 
of challenges is included the potential issue of privacy, whereby “detailed information about electricity use 
could be used by insurers, market analysts, or even criminals to track the daily routine of consumers; 35% of 
consumers would not allow the utility to control thermostats in their homes at any price (in Europe)” 
(Giordano et al., 2011). Concerns related to privacy also affect utilities, which are held accountable for secure 
data transfer and management, and the costs associated with managing large amounts of data. 
The second main barrier to the diffusion of Smart Grids is that it requires major changes in the power system 
value chain (see Figure 2). Indeed, the traditional system can be seen as a ‘one-way-street’, in which “power is 
generated in large centralised plants, transmitted to regional utilities at high voltage, then transformed into 
medium and low voltage power, and finally delivered to the customer” (Nair, 2017). In order for Smart Grids 
59
to be effectively adopted and diffused, the electricity value chain has to evolve to a ‘two-way’ communicating 
smart system that is controlled by new communication and information facilities, and in which incumbent 
companies are forced to renew their business models so as to stay competitive (Nair, 2017). 
SECTION 3: SMART GRIDS - THE CASE OF NORWAY
Norway has been chosen as a case study since it is one of the leading countries with regards to its renewable 
energy share. Nowadays, 98-99% of the total electricity share comes from hydropower (Fosso et al., 2014) 
although the country still has not achieved the European Renewables Directive, which aimed for reaching 
67% of electricity usage from renewable energy by 2020. 
ACTORS INVOLVED
To effectively develop a sustainable socio-technical transition, a system-building approach is needed: it is 
necessary to create a network in which all actors interact and cooperate. In the Smart Grid evolution, sixteen 
categories of actors have to be involved (Gangale et al., 2017): 
1) Government
2) Consumers, civil society
3) Generation companies
4) Utilities
5) Transmission system operators (TSO): Statnett
6) Distribution system operators (DSO)
7) Retail companies
8) ICT and telecom services: Telenor, Telia, etc.
9) Technology manufacturers: Smartym Pro, Alphonic Network Solutions Pvt.
10) Industry associations
11) Companies providing engineering services 
12) Universities: Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) 
13) Research centres: Norwegian Smart Grid Centre, Norwegian Smart Grid Laboratory, CINELDI
14) Consultancies: 21 Enfo
15) Public institutions 
16) Emerging stakeholders
Since legislation plays a crucial role in Smart Grid development, local governments have to be involved so as 
to implement coordinated policies and sharing responsibility. Norwegian municipalities are extremely 
influential actors, as they have large investments in the power sector: they own 90% of Norway’s electric 
production capacity (Norwegian Ministry of Petroleum and Energy, 2019). Individual, commercial and 
residential consumers must be considered differently, as they use energy diversely and should obtain different 
types of advantages from their energy management. Civil society representatives in the network are central, 
since they represent consumers, the environment and privacy-focused organizations. Moreover, since 
technology optimization is still in its experimentation phase, the incorporation of research institutions and 
universities is vital. The former is needed for the availabilities of niches where the technology can be further 
developed away from uncertainties present in the market. Universities are necessary for having the human 
capital needed to work correctly on those R&D Smart Grid projects. In terms of business and policy analysis, 
60
consulting companies also have to be aligned with other stakeholders in order to get a clear overview of costs 
and benefits involved in energetic projects. 
Actors that are particularly pro-Smart Grid diffusion are new stakeholders that can make profit with a change 
of electrical regime, such as hardware providers, IoT-related companies, electric vehicle firms, and Smart grid 
consulting companies. Counter-actors that have been identified are low-income people, in particular those 
who have more important priorities than their energy management and consumption and are more concerned 
with reducing their bills by using less fuel or choosing the cheapest alternative (which currently is still fossil 
fuels) (Silvast et al., 2018). We also identify current (fossil fuel-sourced) energy suppliers as counter-actors, 
who are resistant to a sustainable transition in energy provision and consumption. This is because their 
current business models generate high profits, and their interaction at institutional and governmental levels 
makes them resilient to a change in the existing socio-technical regime. 
CURRENT STATUS OF NORWAY
The Norwegian Smart Grid laboratory was opened in 2016 to integrate real-time simulations and physical 
power system assets. One of its main features is the flexibility in its setup, which allows a range of use cases 
to be tested, from smart homes/micro-grids to Alternative Currents or multi-terminal Direct Current 
transmission systems (Global Smart Grid Federation, 2017). 
Moreover, Norway is the nation with the largest market share for electric vehicles (55.6%) (Manthey, 2020), 
which enhances its potential for the implementation of vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology. Consumers are able 
to charge electric vehicles and constantly monitor their energetic consumption, leading to a better 
management of energy efficiency, in particular during peak hours. 
CURRENT POLICIES AROUND SMART GRIDS IN NORWAY
NORWEGIAN SMART GRID CENTRE (NSGC)
The starting point of Norwegian Smart Grid policies was the establishment of the Norwegian Smart Grid 
Centre (NSGC) in 2010, a national strategy implemented by the Norwegian Ministry of Petroleum and 
Energy for defining the future of energy R&D in Norway (Fosso et al., 2014). NSGC is a strategic 
partnership which involves all actors which gravitate around Smart Grid initiatives. This project aims to 
strengthen the following functions of the TIS:
1) Knowledge development and diffusion
2) Resource mobilisation
3) Entrepreneurial experimentation
It currently has 46 members, including universities, research institutions, manufacturers, and power, ICT and 
consulting companies (Global Smart Grid Federation, 2017). The centre has three roles:
1) Setting primary issues and managing coordination and mobilisation activities related to the European 
Commission’s Horizon 2020 Programme and the Norwegian Centres for environment-friendly energy 
research;
2) Disseminating information and findings from demonstration projects;
3) Trendspotting and technology monitoring (International Energy Agency, 2015)
One of the weaknesses of the NSGC is related to the fact that the multi-stakeholder alignment process can be 
complicated and costly due to the large number of actors involved, with different interest and perspective on 
the development of the technology. 
61
The NSGC has also developed the Demo Norway project for the creation of niches where knowledge and 
Smart Grid technologies can develop isolated from market uncertainties, while creating a new market itself, 
with the aim to achieve the “market formation” function of the TIS. On this laboratory platform, the 
functioning of this technology can be tested repeatedly before its introduction to the market. It is composed 
of eight demo sites with more than 10’000 network customers using Smart meters (Global Smart Grid 
Federation, 2017).
ENERGI21
Regarding energy research, the national R&D strategy (Energi21) was enacted in 2007 by the Norwegian 
Ministry of Petroleum and Energy (International Energy Agency, 2015). This policy focuses mainly on the 
following functions of the TIS:
1) Knowledge diffusion and development
2) Entrepreneurial experimentation
3) Resource mobilization
The execution of this strategy is done by an independent advisory board chosen by the previously mentioned 
ministry (Figure 3). "The primary function of the Energi21 initiative is to provide strategic input and 
recommendations to the authorities on R&D activities that target the development of climate-friendly, 
stationary energy technology" (International Energy Agency, 2015). 
This policy largely contributed to the enhancement in public funding of energy R&D in the 2009 to 2011 
period (International Energy Agency, 2015). The collaboration of a range of stakeholders from the business 
sector, academia and other influential actors is at the base of the policy itself. To be more precise, the shared 
vision for the multi-stakeholder alignment in the strategy is "a climate-friendly energy nation-and an 
international supplier of energy, power, technology and knowledge" (International Energy Agency, 2015). 
R&D investments have been focused in six key areas, namely solar power, raising energy efficiency, 
hydropower, flexible energy systems, offshore wind power, and carbon capture and storage. The policy is 
focused on stationary energy, excluding electric vehicles from its interest, and this is one of its main 
weaknesses. It however does not consider the impact that total electrification of the transport sector (which is 
most likely to happen in the next decades) will have on the sector, in particular on power requirements 
(charging stations), frequency stability and general supply. 
DRIVING FORCES FOR SMART GRIDS IN NORWAY
It is necessary to identify which are the driving forces to Smart Grid diffusion in Norway so as to then be able 
to identify remaining challenges for a wider implementation of this technology. Driving forces can be 
separated into three levels: megatrends, external driving forces and grid related driving forces (Hermansen, 
2019), and are closely interrelated, as we can see in Figure 4 below.
Let us use the example of prosumers, end users that both use and produce energy and are therefore a source 
of distributed generation (CINELDI, 2019), as a driving force (in the generation group) for Smart Grid 
development. The underlying megatrend for this driving force is climate change, which has an influence on 
62
politics, regulation and standardisation, and societal trends and values in order to encourage production from 
renewable forces and spreading environmental awareness to make people want to contribute (Tonje Skoglund 
Hermansen, 2019). Climate change also influences technological development, which provides windows of 
opportunity for new business models and stakeholders, “calls for new planning methods for grid 
development and new aspects to be included in grid operation [which] influences on security of supply” 
(Tonje Skoglund Hermansen, 2019). More distributed generation also impacts on the economy, as the need 
for electricity from the grid will be reduced, but also gives rise to potential safety challenges around the 
control of small-scale generation of energy during blackouts. These internal driving forces and challenges 
then emphasize the need for changes in regulations, and reveal potential external threats, for example new 
channels for hackers to get into the control system of the grid (CINELDI, 2019). All these interactions 
between different levels of driving forces are shown in Figure 5 above. 
REMAINING CHALLENGES
Norway’s TIS does not seem to be prone to any system failures due to collaboration issues between relevant 
actors, which are effectively coordinated through the Norwegian Smart Grid Centre national strategy. Despite 
the advanced level of development of Smart Grids in the country, two main challenges remain and constitute 
a challenge to the wider diffusion of this eco-innovation, which mainly relate to the degree of supply chain 
change that is required when shifting from traditional grids to Smart Grids (as mentioned in Section 2): 
1) Weak grids: supply terminals are weaker than the standardised electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) 
reference, which gives means that the security of supply of electricity is not guaranteed everywhere (Ballo, 
2015)
2) Low voltage system relative to the European average (230 Volt compared to 400 Volt in the majority 
of the region) 
The first challenge is highly related to Norway’s geography, winter conditions and varied topography, which 
makes it difficult for the government and energy providers to meet all of their consumers’ needs (Bach 
Andersen et al., 2019). Indeed, the country’s cold winters mean that households heavily rely on stable 
electricity provision for heating, and will not tolerate black-outs and unreliable energy production. The issues 
that a low voltage system may cause in households are poor appliance performance, intermittent stopping of 
lights or dim lighting, due to appliances not receiving the proper amount of power they need, so they become 
overheated and stop functioning properly (Urvashi G., 2017).
A scenario that may give rise to the two previously mentioned challenges may be partly resulting from the 
ICT competence and organisational aspect driving force, in the cyber security driving force group (Figure 4). 
Indeed, DSOs focus their recruitment procedure on specialised competences, so their employees are either 
working on electric power or ICT. Since these two disciplines are organised in different departments, there is 
a lack of understanding of their interdependence, meaning that departments develop solutions that do not 
work together despite being separately good (Hermansen et al., 2019). Since the systems cannot work 
together, power interruptions last longer, so there is a lower security of supply and therefore also a negative 
impact on the economy (since interruption costs are increased). 
63
SECTION 4: POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
In order to overcome the previously mentioned challenges, we propose a few recommendations that will 
address and improve the following functions of the Smart Grid TIS: knowledge development and diffusion, 
influence on the direction of research, resource mobilisation and indirectly legitimation as research will 
provide more sources of argumentation to push for a full transition to Smart Grids. 
First, Norway must ensure a continuous investment in R&D for Smart Grids and its associated technologies. 
Continued R&D of new energy storage technologies “should focus on improving round-trip efficiency and 
reducing capital costs […] and improving the performance of the most market-ready or highest-valued 
storage systems” (Zame et al., 2018) so as to ensure the continued improvement of Smart Grids system in 
Norway and limit the risks of any technical barriers to diffusion in the future. We also recommend the NSGC 
to invest in the researching ways to circumvent the issues of weak grids and low voltage systems, which 
constitute a great threat to the security of electricity supply. This is especially important due to the “expected 
future increase in number of electric vehicles due to Norway’s generous subsidy policy means that it is highly 
important to invest in maintaining and upgrading the electrical grid so as to be able to deal with increased 
demand of energy” (Ballo, 2015).
In addition to recommending investment in previously mentioned areas for research, we also recognize the 
need for a secure supply of electricity that needs to be tackled in more concrete ways. The Norwegian 
government already financially penalizes companies if a long-lasting black-out occurs, and has introduced 
Smart Meters in all households since January 2019 in order to deal with uncertainty in the security of supply 
of energy, but more needs to be done (Ballo, 2015), as this challenge still remains. In order to tackle this issue, 
and in order to cope with future pressures on the Norwegian Smart Grid, we recommend a three-step 
approach (the first two of which have already been achieved):
1) Intelligent planning
2) Intelligent monitoring
3) Active management and control (Einfalt et al., 2012)
The first step refers to planning an adequate infrastructure for electrical low voltage and ensuring the security 
of supply of energy at all levels. Since this is already functional in less remote areas of the country, we 
recommend Norway to conduct research for intelligently planning the necessary infrastructure for a secure 
supply of energy in most remote and difficult conditions. The second step refers to collecting data from 
Smart Meters, which have already been installed country-wide, so as to understand where exactly issues occur 
and find in which areas it will be necessary to improve and support grid operation. As for the last step, we 
recommend for energy providers and institutions related to the NSGC to conduct “active management and 
control [of energy supply] using communication infrastructures restricted in bandwidth and availability [which 
will] result in new and cost-effective active low voltage network control solution approach enabling higher 
densities of distributed energy resources, e.g. heat pumps, e-mobility, generators, etc.” (Einfalt et al., 2012). 
One last recommendation we could make in order to curtail issues related to the weakness of the Norwegian 
Smart Grid would be to research and implement a virtual-impedance-based control scheme for voltagesource converters and current-source converters, which are used in renewable energy systems (X. Wang et al., 
2015). The main benefit of implementing this scheme is that it acts as an active damper, so a way to control 
and stabilize the power running through the electrical grid (X. Wang et al., 2015). Applying such a scheme 
64
would result in a stable, resistant, and thus stronger Smart Grid that would resist to Norway’s difficult 
topography and seasonal challenges. 
SECTION 5: DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS
We have provided through this paper a complete analysis of the development and diffusion of Smart Grids in 
Norway, using the Technological Innovation System (TIS) as a reference framework. The main aim of this 
report was to identify the remaining barriers to the wider implementation of this eco-innovation, and provide 
policy recommendations to overcome said barriers. We have determined that Norway was advanced and 
effective when looking at the seven sub-processes of TIS, and in implementing niches with the Demo 
Norway programme and Norwegian Smart Grid Laboratory, for example. Because of this, and of the 
effective collaboration between all relevant actors present in the TIS, the remaining barriers to the diffusion 
of Smart Grids are mainly technical and relate to the secure and stable supply of energy. 
The recommendations we have provided in order to cope with said challenges include investment in R&D, a 
three-step approach to ensuring adequate infrastructure, and a virtual-impedance-based control scheme. We, 
however recognize that there are several limitations in our approach, in that our recommendations mainly 
address the supply-side of Smart Grids, and do not necessarily consider the consumer side and the 
unpredictability of their behaviour in terms of energy management. This relates to the idea that the real-world 
economy is different from the theory, as consumers are not always rational actors, and therefore their 
behaviour is difficult to predict. 
The Case Study of Uruguay’s Energy Transition, by Ana López, Anna Muizniece & 
Agustina Pérez
Ana López, Anna Muizniece & Agustina Pérez
Introduction
Social and economic developments place pressures on ecosystems, subsequently influencing both the 
environment and the economy, according to the Driving Forces - Pressures - States - Impacts - Responses 
(DPSIR) system analysis model, which thereafter proposes responses to environmental and economic 
challenges take shape in the form of regulation and eco-innovation (Kemp et al., 2019). Eco-innovation 
requires the identification of “opportunity, capability and positive expectation about economic gains and 
reduced environmental impacts” (Kemp et al., 2019, pg. 396). It also includes the introduction or adoption of 
products or practices that reduce environmental impacts across the entire life cycle, as a means to promote 
green growth and environmental sustainability (Kemp et al., 2019). Both market failures and system failures 
provide rationale for eco-innovation policy intervention, with the former referring to the inadequacies of the 
neoclassical approach and the latter addressing weaknesses of institutions, markets and technology 
infrastructure and competences (Kemp, 2011). Acknowledging economic, social and environmental factors, 
eco-innovation invites promising potential to effectively address substantial societal challenges, including 
climate vulnerability, energy scarcity, resource efficiency and ultimately, nurture the long-term goals of 
sustainable development (Kemp, 2011).
In 2005, the national Uruguayan government began the process of constructing a long-term national energy 
plan, beginning with an analysis of the country’s primary energy mix between 2000 and 2005, which identified 
three major weaknesses, including minimal diversification of national energy sources, high reliance on fossil 
fuels and imported energy sources and substantial climate vulnerability (Sierra, 2016). In 2008, the national 
government approved the National Energy Policy 2005-2030 (NEP), which was endorsed by all Congressional 
political parties in 2010, marking a unified commitment to renewable energies for sustainable development. 
Addressing energy supply and demand, in congruence with institutional and social aspects, the policy aims to 
reduce energy costs and dependence on fossil fuels, improve energy efficiency, attain a more diversified 
energy mix through the promotion of endogenous renewable energy resources and ultimately achieve energy 
sovereignty. The policy outlines strategic short, medium and long term goals for 2015, 2020 and 2030, 
respectively (Sierra, 2016; IRENA, 2015).
Theoretical framework
The aim of this paper is to understand the role of the state and the policy characteristics of the Transition 
Management (TM) process and functions as a form of policy innovation that enabled Uruguay to reconfigure 
its energy matrix in less than ten years. Currently generating 97% of electricity from multiple clean renewable 
sources including wind power, biomass and solar photovoltaic (PV) (Uruguay XXI, 2019). Following Paredis 
(2011), TM is defined as "one type of transition governance processes – which, in general, are meant as forms
of innovation in governance that purposefully try to steer a socio-technical system towards a more sustainable 
direction, by influencing the speed and the direction of the developments going on in and around that 
system" (Paredis, 2011,p. 10). The socio-technical systems - or regimes - are defined as clusters including a 
wide range of elements encompassing technology, infrastructures, culture, market regulation and other 
characteristics that are maintained and reproduced by the incumbent actors (Geels and Kemps, 2007).
69
This analytical lens puts forward the political nature of TM and builds on two complementary frameworks: 
multi-level perspective (MLP) and Policy Arrangement Approach (PAA) (Paredis, 2011). The former focuses 
on enabling context for regime shifts to occur, distinguishing between three different types: reproduction, 
transformation and transition (Geels and Kemps, 2007). According to the authors, system innovations occur 
as a product of the interaction and combination of landscape (macro) pressures that create a "window of 
opportunity" and technological niche developments (micro). The latter emphasizes the political aspects of 
TM concentrating on both the organizational and substantial aspects of policies. Four dimensions are put 
forward: actors and actor coalitions, resources, rules of the game and discourse (Paredis, 2011).
Transition Management
According to Zabaloy and Guzowsk (2018), energy is a driver of economic growth and is therefore a crucial 
component for sustainable development. Firstly, from an economic perspective, it has physical and monetary 
impacts, especially for energy importing countries that are tied to its volatile prices and climate variations. 
Secondly, from a social perspective, access to electricity is a necessary condition to assert basic human rights, 
such as heating and cooking from secured and clean sources. Lastly, from an environmental perspective, "the 
energy sector is the main responsible [source] for anthropogenic emissions of Greenhouse Gases (GHG), in 
particular it represents two-thirds of global anthropogenic emissions (OECD/IEA, 2015)" (Zabaloy and 
Guzowski, 2018, p.3). This illustrates the intricacy of the sector, adding socio-cultural, geopolitical and 
economic dimensions to technological complexity, consequently emphasizing the need for public 
interventions and explicit energy transition policies (Zabaloy and Guzowski, 2018).
The NEP was introduced as an innovative policy aiming to promote and steer the energy sector towards a 
more sustainable development (Stern, 2015). Its success is a product of the combination of available natural 
resources, strong institutional and macroeconomic context, the development of an appropriate regulatory 
framework and successful public-private partnerships. The speed of the transition was influenced by 
technological advancements (especially regarding clean technologies), access to financial investment and a 
conducive public policy (Energía F.G.V., 2016). To understand how these factors interacted and the political 
mechanisms that lead to the positive outcome, this paper discusses the NEP implementation from an MLP 
and PAA approach.
Multi-level perspective
Landscape pressures
At an international scale, growing pressures are pushing an urgent transition towards a more sustainable 
system. The international community’s efforts in advocating the Environmental Agenda emphasizes the 
relevance of the energy sector as a key component in the transition to a greener economy since population 
growth and economic growth are directly related to energy demand and therefore to carbon emissions. It 
became thus imperative to rethink the energy systems, especially in countries from the global South, where a 
major increase in energy demand is expected (Energía F.G.V., 2016). "Worldwide there are diverse private 
initiatives, public policies and social movements involving transformations from conventional forms of 
energy to cleaner ones based on renewable sources” (Kamp 2008, Strachan et al. 2006 in Ardanche et al., 
2017, p. 1). Upper-middle and high income countries, who are currently accountable for 86% of CO2 
emissions (Ritchie, 2018) are mainly driven by climate change mitigation purposes (Recalde, 2016).
70
At a regional level, Latin America is no exception of these movements, but other motives and methods also 
prevail. Governments are embarking on energy transitions towards New and Renewable Energy Sources 
(NRES) in order to reduce their environmental impact, but also to address other pressing challenges intrinsic 
to developing economies such as increasing energy security and reducing external dependence (Recalde, 
2016). Furthermore, current levels of economic development hamper the social engagement and 
legitimization of energy transition policies. Grassroots movements prioritize other societal issues rather than 
climate change, despite the fact that paradoxically, vulnerable populations in Latin America are very exposed 
to climate change hazards (Energía F.G.V., 2016).
At a national level, Uruguay has a strong tradition of state owned enterprises (SOEs) for the provision of 
basic services. "[T]hese considerations were key elements to prevent the privatization of many SOEs in the 
1990s through direct democracy instruments" (Aboal et al., 2019, p. 12), which in the context of ramping 
privatization sponsored by the Washington Consensus across Latin America, prevented pressures that would 
undermine the leveraging power of the government. However, other factors at a national level pressured the 
existing regime. The combination of an insufficient domestic electricity capacity due to hydropower depletion 
and Argentina’s weakened energy system, failed to meet the need of Uruguay’s growing demand for energy 
imports, highlighting the importance of an energy security strategy based on energy sovereignty (Ardanche et 
al., 2017; Sabatier, 1993, Jimeno, 2014). What is more, in 2004 for the first time in the history of the country, 
a left-wing party coalition won the national elections, putting forward new actors and new priorities. These 
pressures destabilized the socio-technical system, highlighting and worsening issues of the existing energy 
regime and therefore creating a “window of opportunity”, that allowed for technological niche developments 
to breakthrough, diffuse and reshape the weakening regime.
Technological Niche development
The energy matrix transition is an outcome of the interplay between different processes that can be divided in 
three different stages (Geels and Kemp, 2007). Firstly, for over several decades, researchers and scientists 
have focused on developing technology to improve the generation and use of renewable sources of energy. 
At an international level, major breakthroughs regarding costs and operationalization, particularly of wind 
power and solar energy combined with a local knowledge accumulation in academia (e.g. Wind Maps created 
by FIng - UdelaR) allowed for radical innovations to emerge (Ardanche et al., 2017).
Secondly, "UdelaR created in 2003 a space for the interaction of diverse actors: academia, NGOs, productive 
sector, government, [and] labor unions" (Ardanche et al., 2017), which strengthened links and provided 
resources to further develop small market niches. In 2005, with the change in government and the direct 
appointment of researchers and scientists at the head of energy public firms, the new technologies developed 
further and started to diffuse in a changing regime scheme. The technical niches were composed by the 
adoption of foreign technologies and complemented by the possibility of domestic production (due to 
progress in lower production costs) and integration of other technological niches (e.g. Software industry in 
Uruguay and the development of SimSEE). Moreover, these changes provided the necessary funds for R&D 
in energy and a socio-cultural change to prioritize a transition in the national energy matrix and therefore the 
development of the long term vision embedded in the NEP, framing energy access as a human right 
(Ardanche et al., 2017).
Finally, in 2008 and particularly after 2010 with the full development of the NEP, the diffusion of the 
renewable sources of energy proliferated and a new structure for the matrix was established. With the influx 
of private capital through foreign investment (incentivized with 20-year contracts at a fixed price), the 
71
required infrastructure is developed, as the new socio-technical system is set in place and stabilized. There is a 
"professionalization" of the frontrunner and even complementary policies of communication and education 
programs are developed (Ardanche et al., 2017). The two main sources of renewable energy became wind 
power and co-generation of biofuels (Bersalli, 2018).
Therefore, the pressure of the landscape weakened the incumbent regime, allowing for new innovation to 
thrive and a new socio-technical system to be set in motion. All levels were involved in the transition and the 
incumbent actors had to reorient their intentions and actions in order to prevail in the energy sector. 
Responding to macro pressures and with the available and generated innovative technologies, the top down 
strategy to steer the transition management towards a renewable energy matrix, in the quest of a more 
sustainable path to development could be considered successful, despite newly arising challenges.
Policy Arrangements of the National Energy Policy 2005-2030
In order to understand the political dimension of Uruguay’s energy transition this section explores the policy 
arrangements which contributed to the acceptance and implementation of NEP. In doing so, it will present 
the changes at the regime level in terms of actors and actor coalitions, resources, rules of the game and 
discourses, which enabled for the stabilization of a focus in renewable energies generation (Paredis, 2011).
Actors and actor coalitions
The energy transition triggered by the NEP was consolidated on the basis of a network of heterogeneous 
actors which through negotiation enabled the development of renewable energy sources. The relevant actors 
can be divided into four main communities: entrepreneurial, academic, public sector and societal groups 
(Dutrénit et al., 2018). Overall, the implementation of the NEP followed a top-down approach, through 
which the government, by influencing market conditions, was able to steer stakeholders towards systemic 
efficiency. Some actors, in particular members of the academic community and public officials, had 
developed trust relationships through dialogue involved in the early stages of wind power projects (Goñi et 
al., 2015). In this case, the exchange of knowledge among these two communities promoted a synergic 
alliance among university researchers and government actors for the development of technical capacity 
needed for renewable energy policy. Furthermore, the election of a new government with closer ties to 
academia led to the integration of the visions of different communities (i.e. academic and public sector), 
which was later instrumental for the further integration of the private sector (Ardanche et al., 2017).
Nonetheless, linkages between new actors led to new spaces of dialogue which allowed for the identification 
of strengths and weaknesses in the development of renewable energies, specifically wind energy (Ardanche et 
al., 2017). Actors, such as the entrepreneurial community and the private sector, emerged as a consequence of 
this dialogue process. An example of an entrepreneurial actor was the Eolic Energy Uruguayan Association 
(AUDEE), which investigated different financial instruments as well as national and international cooperation 
in wind power projects, and represented the private sector’s and government energy agencies’ (DNE and 
Energy, and Water Services Regulatory Unit (URSEA) interests. AUDEE played a key role in integrating 
entrepreneurs, financial investors and promoters of the eolic market (Ardanche et al., 2017).
72
The synergic alliance between academia and government, in combination with the multi-party support for the 
NEP was key in establishing a well-design institutional framework underpinning the long-term collective 
vision required for a successful transition. The regulatory framework established a clear direction by 
providing clarity on the choice of technology that was being supported, and a regulatory umbrella for two 
major axis of action: demand and supply (Aboal et al., 2019; Energía F.G.V., 2016). The supply axis had the 
objective of diversifying the energy matrix (both in terms of sources and suppliers) through an increase in the 
use of local renewable sources of energy, by promoting both transfer of technology and development of 
Uruguayan knowledge capacities (Ardanche et al., 2017; Aboal, 2019). The demand axis of the NEP aimed at 
establishing financing mechanisms which had the ability to promote technical and procedural modifications at 
the industrial and household level, in order to improve efficiency in energy use (Energía F.G.V., 2016).
Resources and Instruments
Nevertheless, the key factor for the involvement of private investors in the renewable energy business was the 
development of win-win solutions. The supply-side design of NEP was supported by the practical exercise of 
stakeholder and price check through public tenders in a clear learning by doing process (Ardanche et al., 
2017). The use of auctions as a main instrument for the promotion of renewable electricity in which UTE 
awarded power purchase agreements (PPAs) to successful bidders is an example. A first exploratory public 
tender aimed at 20 MW of wind energy, biomass and small hydropower contracted with UTE, respectively. 
The response was poor as the uncertainty associated with returns to investment was still high. The second 
public tender aimed at 150 MW and received offers up to 920 MW. This time stakeholders were provided 
with a wind map updated by FIng. Moreover, the combination of auctions with feed-in-tariffs, especially used 
to promote solar energy, acted as a main attraction for the private sector given the favorable investment 
conditions brought about by UTE’s obligation to purchase all energy produced at a fixed price for 20 years, 
regardless of whether the energy was being absorbed by the grid. Hence, tender changes represented a 
positive result out of government intervention, which attracted the participation of private sector actors in the 
energy sector (IRENA, 2015; Ardanche et al., 2017). In fact, the introduction of feed-in-tariffs is a positive 
example of how the Uruguayan government, through an interactive learning process with bidders, realized 
about the need for a synergetic policy mix (i.e. the combination of auctions with feed-in-tariffs) (Dijk et al., 
2020).
Another policy instrument was net metering for small wind power, solar, biomass and mini hydro systems. 
This allowed for the storing of unused energy in a smart grid in exchange for credits for later consumption 
(IRENA, 2015). Moreover, the Uruguayan government introduced a framework of fiscal incentives to 
promote investment on renewable energy resources. Tax exemptions associated with renewable electricity 
generation started at 90% and decreased gradually over ten years. In addition, wind power and solar 
equipment were both exempted from VAT. Finally, in order to minimize environmental impact, all types of 
power plants over 10 MW required a prior environmental authorisation and operational permit. This also 
applied to biomass power plants using residues, regardless of their size, and the required environmental 
authorisation which included a decommissioning plan (ibid.).
Although synergic alliances among key actors enabled a strong institutional framework which directed and 
partly enabled the supply-side of the NEP to bring in the private sector into the transition, Uruguay’s 
previous financial energy arrangements also contributed to the success of the national plan in this regard. The 
absence of electricity subsidies in the previous fossil fuels and hydropower based regimes enhanced the 
competitiveness of new energy sources in the electricity market. Hence, the successful support of 
73
autochthonous renewable sources of energy was also partly a result of a transition towards a more open 
electricity production system which enabled the penetration of new actors willing to explore mechanisms for 
renewable energy deployment (Jimeno, 2014).
Rules of the game
Furthermore, the government coupled the abovementioned supply-side policy interventions with projects 
aiming to improve the technological groundings and capacities of the country with reference to the 
development and deployment of renewable energy sources (Jimeno, 2014). Initiatives supporting international 
policy learning were key interventions in breaking lock-ins which sunk costs associated to training and 
infrastructure for the previous fossil fuel and hydro power-based regimes (Mytelka et al., 2012). Collaboration 
between the Uruguayan-German Chamber of Commerce and the Spanish Agency for International 
Development, for instance, enhanced horizontal dialogue allowing domestic actors to observe, consult and 
learn from international practices. A second example of international policy learning was the joint venture 
project named Peralta formed by the German company EAB New Energy, its Brazilian GCEE subsidiary EPI 
Energía, and the Uruguayan company SEG Ingeniería, which contributed to enhance domestic developers 
technical knowledge and capabilities (Jimeno, 2014).
With regards to the demand side of the NEP, the goal was to satisfy the national demand upholding efficient 
and sustainable consumption. In this area, the Uruguayan government focused on promoting renewable 
energy heating through a mandate for solar hot water, a domestic and subsidy program for domestic solar 
water heaters and fiscal incentives, the Solar Plan in 2012 aimed at increasing the use of solar water heating in 
households. The plan provided optional financing for the public mortgage bank (BHU), with payments 
included in electricity bills. UTE also started offering electricity bill discounts for the first 2000 users as an 
incentive (IRENA, 2015). Overall, despite the consistency of these policies with regards to achieving a more 
efficient use of energy, the gap between producers’ expectations and consumer’s behavior, led the NEP to 
attain worse than expected results from the demand-side of the program. This highlights the dependence of, 
for instance, the Solar Plan in 2012, on previous government intervention trying to understand consumer 
behavior, requiring a synergic or reinforcing relationship between both policies (Dijk et al., 2020)
Discourse
Overall, although there is change to follow an endogenous and sustainable energy model, and this is partly 
affected by the Environmental Agenda pressures at the landscape level, the goal of NEP promoting an 
efficient use of energy is not fully achieved because the government fails to account for energy consumer’s 
behavior. Intervention aiming at spreading this message through educational campaigns and awareness 
initiatives would have enhanced a full change in the country’s energy discourse (Jimeno, 2014).
Regarding the social dimension of the project, NEP was viewed as an instrument for social integration. In 
this sense, the government was responsible for providing inclusive and affordable access to different energy 
types in order to meet the population’s needs. In this context, the NEP failed to account for social groups 
given their minimal participation. The fact that there was no organized social community representing users 
or local populations in neighborhoods near wind parks is believed to have led to information asymmetries 
which acted as barriers to local empowerment and fueled the opposition to the installation of wind parks. The 
main sources behind the lack of social acceptance of wind parks were their visual and environmental impact. 
While public hearings were part of the installation process of wind parks, many local organizations stated that 
this had a more informative rather than binding character (Ardanche et al., 2017). In any case, public 
74
demonstrations by citizens residing in the vicinity of wind parks reflected the lack of social legitimation of the 
NEP. Social opposition was also manifested from the workers union in the public energy enterprise, 
protesting increased energy costs for citizens, due to NEP’s business model and expected high returns to 
private investment as a result of UTE’s obligation to purchase all eolic energy produced (Ardanche et al., 
2017). The lack of social support was even more evident in the 2019 marches', organized by over 60 civil 
society organizations, that gathered up to thousands of protesters against the implementation of a second 
UPM pulp mill plant in Uruguay. Reflecting that the government's and the companies effort to improve their 
public support has failed to induce behavioral changes, despite national and international recognitions of 
environmental friendly bio-industrial processes (Civicus, 2019; UPM Media, 2020).
Conclusion and Policy Recommendations
The success of the NEP can be, therefore, attributed to the building upon existing capacities which had been 
accumulated in the academic sector in the first stages of the transition, and the further development of new 
capacities through international policy learning initiatives during the implementation of the national energy 
plan. In turn, the quality of these learning processes rested upon circles of trust; firstly developed between the 
academic community and the State, and later incorporating the private sector. Moreover, the long-term 
political support of the NEP was crucial in establishing a strong institutional framework which could attract 
private investment by turning energy into an attractive, low risk and high return sector (Ardanche et al., 
2017;Energía F.G.V., 2016).
In conclusion, the Uruguayan energy transition can be considered a policy renewal given that it represents an 
example in which the introduction of a new discourse advocating for renewable energy, especially wind 
power, and the new institutional arrangement of the NEP replaced the institutional arrangements of the 
previous socio-technical regime (Paredis, 2011). Two policy recommendations are outlined below to facilitate 
the continued success of the country’s renewable energy transition under the NEP. The first recommendation 
emphasizes the importance of social acceptance in response to the presence of social resistance to new energy 
technologies, while the second focuses on future challenges of continued transition across various sectors, 
highlighting the need for endogenous capacity development.
Social acceptance
While social resistance did not impede the success of the energy transition, the oppositions “can be seen as 
significant weaknesses in the social acceptance of the process and sources of potential conflicts which 
contrasts with the consensus between academia and politics” (Ardanche et al., 2018, p. 355). Social 
acceptance refers to three dimensions: socio-political, community and market acceptance. Market acceptance 
addresses consumer, investor and intra-firm acceptance. Socio-political acceptance relates to the broadest 
form of societal acceptance, wherein public opinion generally adopts a favorable outlook on renewable energy 
technologies. Consequently, government policies tend to overlook the possibility of social resistance in 
respect to community acceptance. Community acceptance refers to procedural justice, distributional justice 
and trust among local stakeholders, addressing aspects of fairness within decision making processes, shared 
costs and benefits, as well as community trust in the information and intentions of external 
actors(Wüstenhagen et al., 2007, p. 2685; Ardanche et al., 2018).
It is recommended that the government adopts a more participatory and inclusive approach to the 
governance of the ongoing transition process, understanding local communities as major stakeholders, as the 
country works towards the NEP’s 2030 objectives. The recommended approach would increase all three 
components of community acceptance among citizens and local communities, while simultaneously 
decreasing costs, limiting any potential delays in implementation and ultimately supporting the democratic 
legitimacy of the pathway towards sustainable development (Lennon et al., 2019).
75
Capacity development
Policy replacement allowed for the successful energy regime transition, which encompassed “a broad set of 
changes in existing patterns of production and consumption, in the knowledge and skills required, the 
organizational forms, and the business and governance practices, as well as other social habits, practices and 
norms” (Mytelka et al., 2012, pg. 1753). Regime changes require the creation of “capacity for making choices 
about options and configuration, skills for installation, and knowledge for product development, load 
management, defining appropriate policies, and adapting policies to changing circumstances” and moreover, 
regime transitions call for changes in lifestyle and user practices (Mytelka et al., 2012, pg. 1752).
Within the innovation systems approach, capacity refers to “the ability of individuals, organizations, societies, 
and communities to make choices, perform functions, solve problems and set and achieve objectives” 
(Mytelka et al., 2012, pg. 1754). The concept of capacity development, which refers to the “endogenous 
learning process through which these abilities are obtained, strengthened, adapted, maintained, or changed 
over time,” replaces that of capacity building, which assumes insufficient local capacities in developing 
economies (Mytelka et al., 2012, pg. 1754). Capacity development extends beyond the simple transfer of 
technical knowledge from the Global North to the Global South to foster the catch up process of developing 
economies. Rather, the effective adoption and diffusion of technologies relies on innovation practices and 
technological learning. These actions can include the adaptation of technologies to the country environment, 
adjustments to new product mixes and sources of input, upgrades to design, development of research 
capabilities, as well as skills development and training (Mytelka et al., 2012).
Reliant on foreign renewable energy technologies and international learning, the introduction and deployment 
of renewable energy technologies generated several technical challenges for the energy sector. In the instance 
of wind power, wind turbines were imported from Denmark, Germany and Spain, with wind turbine design 
and manufacturing largely beyond national capacity (Ardanche et al, 2017). Moreover, lacking expertise and 
technical knowledge within the wind energy sector in relation to the electricity sector brought about several 
obstacles regarding infrastructure capacity to receive and transport imported wind turbines, wind farm 
installation logistics and electricity grid management, causing delays in wind energy dispatch (Jimeno, 2014). 
While these obstacles were managed in due course, their occurrence highlights the need for endogenous 
expertise and technical knowledge to address future challenges and activities concerning the use, maintenance, 
repair and replacement of renewable energy technologies and their complementary mechanisms, demand 
management and energy efficiency in the electricity sector. It is recommended that continued capacity 
development is promoted within the electricity sector, as well as the heating and transport sectors, as the 
country continues to integrate renewable energies to reach the targets outlined in the NEP.
Zero Energy Houses: The case of Norway, by Inês Ruas, Anastasia Velonaki, Alena Pridiri
Inês Ruas, Anastasia Velonaki, Alena Pridiri
Introduction
For a long time, buildings have been identified as an important man-made structure posing serious impacts 
on local and global environments, accounting for 20-40% of energy consumption in developed countries 
(Chau, Tse, & Chung, 2010).
Contributing to the attention the building sector gets is also the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission reaching 
values of nearly 40% of the total energy consumption and actually increasing at a higher rate than in the 
industrial and transportation sectors. (Berardi, 2013) To tackle this, the European Union plans to reduce 
GHG emissions by 80% by 2050, when comparing to the levels of 1990 (Andresen, 2017).
Therefore, it is expected that the building sector represents a crucial role in achieving a substantial energy and 
emissions reduction in the future in order to reach global energy and environmental targets (OECD/ IEA, 
2013).
As it’s known, buildings also consume a big amount of raw materials and generate a meaningful amount of 
waste during their process of construction as well as demolition (Chau, Tse, & Chung, 2010). This 
importance for shifting into more sustainable building is also confirmed by their contribution to the general 
economy, since the overall economic value of construction represents 10% of the world GDP (Berardi, 
2013).
The buildings sector uses a large variety of technologies and these are used in the building envelope and in its 
components. They can be used in space heating and cooling systems, lighting, devices and consumer 
products. Many measures can be applied and already act as cost effective, and others need a modest 
government support and incentives to become cost effective. Moreover, there are many areas that together 
with synergies and integrated systems approach can result in a great energy-saving potential (OECD/ IEA, 
2013).
Along this paper we will be focusing specifically in Zero Energy Buildings (ZEB) even though there can be 
other options within the building sector. Therefore, a ZEB is “an energy-efficient building where, on a source 
energy basis, the actual annual delivered energy is less than or equal to the on-site renewable exported energy” 
(Peterson, Torcellini, & Grant, 2015). These buildings produce sufficient energy to satisfy its own annual 
energy consumption fulfilment, being able to reduce the use of non-renewable energy in the building sector. 
This is possible thanks to energy efficiency measures and renewable energy systems that produce enough 
energy to meet remaining energy needs (Peterson, Torcellini, & Grant, 2015).
Several countries have either adopted ZEBs or are considering to establish ZEBs as their future building 
energy targets. Furthermore, a number of case studies already exist worldwide indicating the potential ZEBs 
can have, contributing to alleviate the reduction of energy resources and the decline of our environment (Li, 
Yang, & Lam, 2013).
79
Moving towards ZEBs brings some long-term advantages such as lowering the environmental impacts, 
reducing operating and maintenance costs, improved resiliency to power outages and natural disasters, and 
enhanced energy security (Peterson, Torcellini, & Grant, 2015).
A ZEB concerns two approaches: diminishing the demand for energy use in buildings through energyefficiency measure and using renewable energy and other technologies to fulfil the remaining energy needs 
(Li, Yang, & Lam, 2013).
It is also important to refer that ZEBs also bring social co-benefits, such as improved health or higher 
comfort levels, that then will translate in higher well-being (OECD/ IEA, 2013). However, it is also known 
that the involvement in ZEB’s will increase the perception of their benefits (Berardi, 2013).
We will be directing our attention to the case of Norway since it is a frontrunner country in this ecoinnovation. According to the Norwegian ZEB Centre a “Net ZEB is used to refer to buildings that are 
connected to the energy utility infrastructure, and the wording ‘Net’ underlines the fact that there is a balance 
between energy taken from and supplied back to the energy grid over time”. In this centre, from 2009 to 
2017, they had nine ZEB designed, constructed and operating. Through all these phases data was collected 
and analysed (Andresena, Wiikb, Fufa, & Gustavsen, 2019).
This paper provides a description of the actors involved in ZEBs in Norway, the existing policies this country 
has running for this innovation and also policies that could be missing and hampering the impact of this
technology.
Theoretical framework for use
We consider that this eco-innovation should use a Strategic Collective System Building framework that 
combines views from the technology innovation system and the strategic management frameworks. With this 
framework it’s possible to develop a supportive innovation system while increasing the possibilities of 
successful commercialization and also stimulate the diffusion of ZEBs (Planko, Cramer, Chappin, & Hekkert, 
2016).
The strategic collective system building has four crucial areas (Planko, Cramer, Chappin, & Hekkert, 2016):
Technology development and optimization (expand the technologies in the ZEB, while finding new 
complementary products and services for it)
Socio-cultural changes (adjust society’s values and norms respecting this technology in order to successfully 
embed ZEB in society)
Market creation (initiate a market for this technology by increasing user awareness and consequently demand 
for ZEB)
Coordination (organize and align all actors and their efforts, in order to join forces and use their resources 
accurately)
This strategic collective system building framework can be used to establish goals, split functions and 
responsibilities and assign roles (Planko, Cramer, Chappin, & Hekkert, 2016).
80
In a ZEB most of the separated technologies already existed by themselves, but here they were put together 
in order to make building less harmful for the environment. In this sense it was not as radical innovation as 
the Strategic Niche Management implies.
Moreover, the Strong Structuration Theory is also not adequate. Even though it recognizes the socialtechnical complexity and sees the need for a joint conceptual and methodological discipline this does not fit 
the ZEB context.
Systemic aspects of the innovation (actor system description) 
Norway has early realized that setting regulations solely cannot solve all core ZEB issues, like formulating 
energy efficiency, renewable energy, and grid integration (Zhang, Zhou, Hinge, & Feng, 2015). Therefore, the 
country established the Norwegian Research Centre on Zero Emission Buildings (ZEB Centre) in 2009 to 
overcome the structural challenges that could create barriers to the ZEB diffusion. One of the objectives of 
the Centre is to develop achievable standards for the construction of ZEB that could facilitate for the 
formulation of a feasible to comply with regulatory framework (Fufa, S. M., Dahl, S. R., Sørnes, K., Inman, 
M., & Inger, A., 2016). Towards that direction, various zero-emission pilot houses projects where 
constructed, some of which have already been inhabited (Andresena et al, 2019). Another pillar of research 
the ZEB Centre is focusing on is analyzing the cultural, political, and broader societal patterns that could be 
utilized for successfully delivering the transition to the zero-energy buildings (ZEB Centre, 2020a). 
Moreover, as stated earlier in the paper, ZEB is an eco-innovation not based solely on a specific technology 
but encompasses a variety of them. The technologies and materials employed, as well as their combination, 
are the core elements of the research activities carried out in the ZEB Centre (ZEB Centre, 2020b). The 
knowledge produced by the Centre leads to identifying the solutions needed not only for constructing new 
zero-energy houses but also for converting the existing ones to zero-emission homes (ZEB Centre, 2020c). 
After years of experimentation, the ZEB Centre came out in 2016 with guidelines for the Norwegian 
definition of ZEB and the relevant computation methodologies needed for both designers and developers 
(Fufa et al., 2016). 
For describing the systemic aspects of the ZEB societal eco-innovation, the Penta Helix model (figure 1) is 
utilized as described by Diepenmaat, Kemp, and Velter (2020). This model is preferred since the ZEB Centre 
is the intermediary actor not only because of the different activities it undertakes but also because of its 
structure. 
Figure 1: The Penta Helix model
81
Specifically, it is a national organization equally supervised by the Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology (NTNU) and the SINTEF research institute (ZEB Centre, 2020d; SINTEF, n.d.). As an 
intermediary, the ZEB Centre encompasses 21 public and private actors representing the whole value chain 
of the Norwegian building and construction sector (ZEB Centre, 2020d; ZEB Centre, 2020e). Accurately, 
public authorities are represented by i) the Norwegian Building Authority (DiBK), ii) Enova SF, an 
organization owned by the Ministry of Climate and Environment for promoting the more efficient energy 
consumption, iii) Forsvarsbygg, the Norwegian Defence Estates Agency, iv) Husbanken, the Norwegian 
Housing Bank, v) Sør-Trøndelag Fylkeskommune, Trøndelag region County Council Authority, and vi) 
Statsbygg, a state company owned by the Ministry of Local Government and Modernization for 
implementing government's building policy (ZEB Centre, 2020e).
Furthermore, schools and universities are represented by the NTNU and the SINTEF research institute 
(ZEB Centre, 2020d; SINTEF, n.d.). Lastly, businesses are represented by the Federation of Norwegian 
Construction Industries (BNL), and the following firms: i) Brødrene Dahl, Norway's leading heating, 
ventilation, and sanitation technology wholesaler, ii) ByBo, a real estate developer, iii) Caverion Norge, a 
technical installations contractor, iv) DuPont, a building products producer, v) Entra, a leading real estate 
company owned by the Ministry of Trade and Industry, vi) Glava, a producer of insulation materials, vii) 
Isola, a real estate developer, viii) Multiconsult, a consulting company, ix) NorDan, a building products 
producer, x) Protan, a manufacturer of building materials, xi) SAPA, a building system supplier, xii) Skanska, 
a building contractor and developer, xiii) Snøhetta, an architecture firm, and xiv) Weber, a building products 
producer/supplier (ZEB Centre, 2020e). Through the establishment of the ZEB Centre, the actors are able to 
interact and achieve their final goal, the transition to the zero-energy houses. However, there is a lack of civil 
society organizations that could promote public awareness and express the issues related to society's 
concerns. 
The ZEB Centre encompasses all the different types of businesses that comprise the suppliers of the zeroFigure 2: Energy residential consumption per m2 from 2000 to 2017 
energy houses and need to collaborate to meet the final goal. Specifically, the eco-innovation suppliers are 
developers, architectures, contractors, building product producers/suppliers, and wholesalers. On the other 
hand, the end-users of the eco-innovation are the buyers of homes that could be from individuals and 
companies to governmental and local authorities that own public buildings.
The history of system building activities - actual policies
Norway is a pioneer country in the field of greening the building industry. The country has developed various 
policies towards this direction starting from the year 2007 when the term of energy performance in buildings 
was introduced in the building codes, the “Planning and Building Act” regulation’s technical blueprint 
(Nykamp, 2020). Since 2007 the building codes have been regularly revised to gradually reduce the negative 
environmental impact of buildings in the country, a goal which has been achieved as depicted in figure 2 
(Ruth & Marius, 2017; ODYSSEE-MURE, n.d.). An example of such a reduction is the initial imposition of 
an approximately 35 percent CO2 tax on mineral oil, used for heating, which led to the ban of its use for 
building heating from January 2020 (Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment, 2020). Moreover, 
since 2010 the European Union’s 2002/91/EC directive was fully implemented (Brekke, Isachsen, & Strand, 
2016). The regulatory advancement continued in 2015 when the commitment of all new houses to conform 
to the “Passive House Level” standards was enacted (Ruth & Marius, 2017). Lastly, the 2012 and 2015 
Norwegian Parliament agreements on climate issues stated that from December 2020 all new buildings would 
meet the Nearly Zero Emission Building (NZEB) levels (Brekke et al., 2016).
The ZEB Centre played a central role in the legislation advancement from 2009. The collaboration of all the 
stakeholders under the five pillars of the Centre’s work led to that progress (ZEB Centre, 2020b). Through a 
strong collaboration of all the stakeholders, an adequate policy mix was possible to be formulated according 
to the technological evolution. The greater the technological development, the more generous the policy mix 
introduced. An example of that progression is illustrated in figure 3, with the grants offered by Enova 
increasing year by year (Enova SF, 2020). A variety of system building activities were utilized in that effort, as 
introduced by Planko et al. (2016), which led to the current list of policy instruments as presented in table 1 
(see ANNEX). Specifically, the system-building activities employed so far were mainly from the three out of 
the four key areas of strategy making, as displayed in table 2. Accurately, utilizing these system-building 
activities the technologies and materials required for the construction of the ZEBs have already been 
developed (Andresena et al, 2019). Moreover, the ZEB Centre has contributed to the coordination activities 
applied. Lastly, only Hurst, N. (2018). In Norway two out of the five market creation activities have been 
utilized until today, while some little progress has been achieved towards the socio-cultural pillar, with just 
some small-scale activities been implemented mainly related to the generation of a skilled pool of labor and 
altering user behavior. Although the progress Norway has achieved towards meeting the goal of energyefficient buildings, there are many barriers to overcome by utilizing the appropriate system-building activities 
to reach the ultimate goal of zero-energy houses.
- - -
Table 2: System-building activities employed until today in Norway towards the effort of meeting the goal of 
ZEBs. 
Figure 3: Number of grants provided within the Enova Subsidy scheme in years 2017, 2018, and 2019. 
Source: Enova SF, 2020
84
Barriers to diffusion
As mentioned in the previous part, stakeholders actively participate and develop ZEB in four main areas: 
technological, organization and coordination, socio-cultural, and market. Based on empirical data from 
additional literature a number of barriers in these areas have been identified that affect the active 
implementation and dissemination of ZEB technology. 
Technologies, innovative solutions, and knowledge dissemination
Even today, projects on ZEB are considered very ambitious and for the implementation of these projects, it 
is necessary to have certain technical knowledge as well as to distribute information in terms of technical 
aspects to improve and implement the experience gained. In Norway, there is an uneven distribution of 
knowledge, which is an obstacle in the decision-making process and a problem in the modernization process. 
Many stakeholders do not have sufficient knowledge and experience at both the construction and decisionmaking levels. Owners may not know how to start an energy renovation. In the public sector, there is also 
often a lack of understanding of the long-term picture of the energy supply system and therefore a lack of 
competence when considering major energy renovation projects. (Levin, 2014) Since some ZEB projects are 
seen as difficult, risky or unrealistic, many contractors develop and implement ZEB projects using simplified 
standards, or so-called "low ambition" which are less environmentally and energy-efficient (Lindkvist, 
Karlsson, Sørnes, Wyckmans, 2014).
Large organizations and private property owners have knowledge of technical solutions for major repairs, but 
this knowledge is not always extensive enough to make optimal cost decisions. However, residential repairs 
are made not only by large organisations but also by individuals. Individuals tend to have a limited degree of 
knowledge about general repairs and even less knowledge about the technical aspects of energy-efficient 
repairs. (Karlsson, Lindqvist, Wojtczak, Stachurska-Kadziak, Holm, Sornes, Schneuwly, Tellado, Rodriguez, 
2013) Moreover, there are restrictions on technical solutions that can be installed in the house, as well as a 
number of standards that should be taken into account. 
Financial incentives
Energy-efficiency goals are usually subordinated to the economic considerations and capabilities of the 
country. In Norway, there is a lack of financial incentives for modernization, developing and implementing 
the ZEB. The country has low energy costs and high construction costs that reduce the incentives to invest in 
low-energy construction, since there is a possibility to have little return and the payback period can be 
extremely long. Energy-efficient equipment is quite costly as such high prices are mentioned as the main 
barrier. The public and private sectors generally invest only in high-performance solutions. Moreover, the 
public sector usually requires that the return on investment is clearly spelled out, which often makes it 
difficult to find capital for expensive projects. It requires good documentation and reasoning to convince 
investors that an energy project can be a good commercial deal in the long term. (Karlsson, Lindqvist, 
Wojtczak, Stachurska-Kadziak, Holm, Sornes, Schneuwly, Tellado, Rodriguez, 2013) 
At the same time, homeowners themselves are responsible for house reconstruction and invest either 
individual savings or apply to housing associations. However they are also reluctant to consider switching to 
energy-efficient equipment since the return on investment is low. Moreover, residents of Norway note that 
there is little market interest in energy-efficient technologies, as such, low bills can only cover high labor and 
equipment costs in the long term. (Lindkvist, Karlsson, Sørnes, Wyckmans, 2014)
85
Socio-cultural 
Cultural and historical values have always played a significant role in the decision-making process. Moreover, 
in the conditions of technological development, they could play both a stimulating factor and an existing 
barrier. In Norway the modernization of cultural and historical buildings as well as the established values of 
construction is a barrier to the transition to nZEB. Moreover, most owners follow the "Do it yourself" 
principle in matters of construction or restoration, while a highly qualified specialist is required to make a 
decision on the creation of an nZEB. There is also a perceived risk of being an early adopter in nZEB, based 
on the fact that there is an individual approach by owners to the process of upgrading buildings and there is 
no single solution for the end user.(Lindkvist, Karlsson, Sørnes, Wyckmans, 2014) 
“The biggest challenge might be to convince everyone of the need to make a building that was both high-tech 
and homey, and that the one without the other is not a good house,” Anne Cecilie Haug and Kristian 
Edwards, senior architects (Ferro, 2015)
Organizational and legal
The complexity of different stakeholders in the modernization and decision-making process is seen as an 
obstacle in Norway. Government plays a key role in promoting energy-efficient buildings, so legislation 
affects different players and competing interests. At the same time in Norway there are no specific 
requirements for energy distribution and ventilation which leads to uncertainty for the decision making 
process and also has an impact on the modernization process (Lindkvist, Karlsson, Sørnes, Wyckmans, 2014).
Currently, the ZEB market exists and develops doe to large companies that know that they may not get a 
high economic return, but want to develop the skills that will be required in the future, as well as receive 
positive advertising from efficient construction. However, small construction companies do not have the 
same enthusiasm and incentive to improve their skills, since the market does not require energy-efficient 
construction on a large scale (Karlsson, Lindqvist, Wojtczak, Stachurska-Kadziak, Holm, Sornes, Schneuwly,
Tellado, Rodriguez, 2013). Therefore, there is a need for better regulation of zero energy construction in the 
market. Political decisions and social responsibility of the public sector play an important role in making 
investment decisions and can increase the profitability of ZEB and positive cash flow in the construction 
market (Levin, 2014).
Policy proposals and necessary institutional changes 
In order for the ZEB industry to actively develop, a comprehensive approach to all four main areas of 
strategic development is necessary. For each of the areas, a number of actions were proposed that can 
contribute to the development and strengthening of ZEB in the country. Moreover, it is important to actively 
involve existing stakholders in the problem of spreading energy-efficiency projects, as well as to consider the 
possibility of attracting new institutions and stakeholders.
Technologies, innovative solutions, and knowledge dissemination
To achieve a breakthrough in the field of nZEB, it will be necessary to combine the knowledge of all the 
different levels of infrastructure work in order to find synergy. In this situation, the Norwegian government 
should develop more technical solutions along with the dissemination of knowledge in this area (Weiss, 
Meier, Knotzer, Höfler, 2019). At this approach, it is important to consider not only possible technological 
changes, but also to develop new strategies for using resources and technologies. Positive engagement can 
86
encourage ambitious and risky projects. At the same time, it is necessary to take into account the realism of 
projects. Commitment to high ambitions with an unknown technical environment can cause projects to fail. 
Less ambitious projects can still be energy-efficient.
It is necessary to promote the knowledge of service personnel, owners and project teams. First of all, it is 
necessary to determine the level of awareness about energy-efficient projects among these groups. A 
stimulating approach to the development of the eco-energy sector can be the creation of appropriate training 
programs for various stakeholders and key actors (Milovanović, Bagarić, Tzanev, Petran, 2019). This will 
allow the country to develop deeper knowledge in the field of energy and the environment, and will also 
contribute to the demand in society for energy-efficiency. In general, it is important to find a method to 
increase the level of motivation among various stakeholders.
Financial incentives
In the interests of financial institutions and the future sustainable development of the country, there is a need 
to develop various business models that take into account both short-term and long-term investments. The 
government can provide financial support to owners in carrying out energy repairs, paying for additional 
expenses necessary to achieve low energy levels. In addition, there is a need to develop funding schemes for 
specific types of measures and assessments. It is also important to consider subsidies for measuring, 
evaluating and documenting demonstration construction projects with high energy-efficiency ambitions. 
Financial support measures for property owners will help to show the advantages of participating in 
innovative projects compared to traditional ones. In addition, when a real estate owner sees the added value 
of these projects, for example, when the experience of one modernization project can also be applied in 
future projects, they have a higher motivation to invest in the modernization and energy reconstruction of the 
building. (Levin, 2014)
The government can also promote the ZEB industry by lowering the discount rate and raising energy taxes, 
which would make investment in long-term building improvements more attractive. In addition, the most 
honest and fair relationship between real estate owners and organizations in the financial sphere is also 
important. Owners should have a more complete overview and comparison of future operating costs with 
and without measures, such as when investments are not made and what the operating costs will be after 
reconstruction.
Socio-cultural
This aspect includes both individual perception and socio-economic perception. The development of a social 
institution should not only include raising awareness among residents but should take into account how the 
ZEB can address the broad social aspects of living. It is extremely important to raise public awareness about 
the benefits of energy-efficient buildings. The result can be achieved through educational channels and 
institutions, as well as through the involvement of the media and energy professionals.
To some extent, social barriers can also be avoided by involving residents in a building renovation project, 
thereby working with end users and increasing knowledge about how the heating and ventilation system will 
be used to ensure their comfortable use in the building. Or, upon completion of the reconstruction / 
construction of the building, residents may be issued manuals on the operation of the building in accordance 
with the project. In this case, they have access to information about the optimal way to live in their home.
87
Organizational and legal
Competent assessment at various stages of the nZEB project is one way to combine and use the perspectives 
of various stakeholders to make future decisions. Moreover, it is necessary to develop certain standards for 
regulating the renovation of old or historical buildings. (Weiss, Meier, Knotzer, Höfler, 2019)
At the stage of project formation, it is very important to ensure a good level of communication between all 
the necessary participants in the construction industry: architects, engineers, clients, contractors, etc. Preproject seminars can provide a clear and understandable statement of project goals, building performance 
targets, as well as solving a number of problems at an early stage. (Karlsson, Lindqvist, Wojtczak, StachurskaKadziak, Holm, Sornes, Schneuwly, Tellado, Rodriguez, 2013)
6.5. New social relations
In many cases, it is also important to develop new social interactions for the successful development of 
technology. For example, there is an IEE project that aims to improve the energy performance of existing 
non-residential buildings on a large scale. This project also aims to demonstrate that energy-efficient buildings 
can also meet the profitability requirements set by the building owner/investor. The project is aimed at five 
countries: Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland, and Estonia. (Levin, 2014) Since these countries are already 
linked by the goal of a single project, it can be assumed that the development of the relationship between 
them can help to strengthen the ZEB approach in construction, as well as increase knowledge diffusion and 
lead to the growth of awareness among the population: users, investors, specialists in various fields etc.
Limitations of the analysis
It is valuable to start by enhancing that isolated policy initiatives don’t have enough capacity and, to be able to 
understand the specific policy initiatives, it’s crucial to learn about the entire energy system involving ZEBs. 
(Drysdale, Mathiesen & Paardekooper, 2019).Through our work a limitation comes from the number of 
ZEBs running being small and, even though the data collected about them is good, this is still not sufficient 
for a bigger scale installation of ZEBs. Moreover, there was not enough information about public funding 
schemes to stimulate investment in ZEBs besides the construction of those buildings connected to the ZEB 
Centre. This also applies to house refurbishment in order to achieve a better energy-efficiency.
Conclusions
Barriers in the decision-making process to adopt ZEB are related to problems in the modernization process. 
In Norway, there is insufficient dissemination of technical knowledge in the field of ZEB reconstruction 
within the framework of the processes considered. The results also indicate that decisions to renovate 
building owners are influenced by factors such as a lack of social understanding of what energy-efficiency 
means, financial constraints, and the lack of clear rules for zero-energy construction. Based on the detected 
barriers, a number of interventions in various key areas were proposed in this paper.
Overall, Norway has come a long way in the field of ZEB, and decision makers are carefully considering how 
their ZEB will develop in the future and are clearly concerned about future progress. Although technical, 
financial, social, and organizational issues were discussed separately, it is important to understand that each of 
them overlaps with the other. Existing barriers and solutions cannot be considered mutually exclusive when 
setting new tasks and solutions. The final result of this study indicates that the ZEB field is developing in 
Norway and these projects are appearing more often. This work may also raise a question for future research: 
88
How effectively is knowledge transferred to other ZEB projects? And is it true that Norway's energy goals are 
becoming higher than economic considerations?
