Sustainable growth must be valued over scaleability by venture capitalists in order to produce stronger companies and more stable returns, write Adun Okupe, Yasmin Osaghae, and Natalie Beinisch.


One of the greatest ambitions of the Sustainable Development Goals is to mobilize private sector finance to meet its seventeen social and environmental targets. The theory is that it is only through the private sector that the quantum of investment is available to create scalable solutions to address global social and environmental challenges.

Indeed, scale is a fundamental pillar across the investment chain. For venture capital investors, scale in terms of the capacity to multiply revenues is a reward for taking a risk on young and uncertain enterprises. For institutional investors, scale in terms of ticket size is the most efficient way to deploy capital. Businesses that are designed with the capacity to scale are therefore better suited to create opportunities for investors and efficiencies in the market.

Investment aside, businesses that scale add value to the economy and society for other important reasons. For example, business scale improves the potential for partnerships because it provides a platform to develop and test new ideas that can deliver value to customers in novel ways. Industry giants are the darlings of university research centers not only because of their potential as generous patrons but also because they can provide distribution channels to commercialize experimental solutions.

The digital revolution has furthermore demonstrated how scale improves the diffusion of knowledge and access to technical solutions. Emerging industries such as ed-tech, telemedicine, and de-centralized manufacturing are transforming how people access information and develop their technical skills. It is only through scale that these technologies can be more accessible to communities.

Scale cannot be an independent optic.

However, irrespective of the fundamental benefits of business scalability, it is not appropriate and even dangerous to use this optic alone to evaluate the potential of emerging businesses, especially those which are aiming to deliver value in a way that is compatible with the sustainable development goals.

The focus on scale obscures the need to focus on sustainable growth and development of capacity of emerging businesses.

On its own, scalability is a poor criterion for assessing the quality and potential of start-ups that are building “sustainable” and “circular” businesses, that is businesses that seek to create value while also delivering on the sustainable development goals. There are three key reasons for this.

Firstly, the focus on scale obscures the need to focus on sustainable growth and development of capacity of emerging businesses. These skills are foundational to scaling but are often overlooked. Even in tech, where scale through users is an important factor determining the viability of a business model, there are many examples of corporate failure due to the structural weakness, lack of controls, and lack of management development of young entrepreneurs. The collapse of FTX and other cryptocurrency operators is a recent and memorable example that has led to the destruction of billions of dollars of value, almost overnight.

In an African context, specifically that of Nigeria, administrative and managerial capacity is even more fundamental than business scalability compared to other contexts because talent development is a substantial issue. For example, a skills-gap assessment carried out by UNIDO in 2016, found that the productivity of the Nigerian workforce trailed that of South Africa by a factor of five. These findings are corroborated by an Equinix survey of the IT sector that found 58% of employers feel that a lack of skilled personnel is a threat to their business. Without relevant skills development, companies are not in a position to scale in a way that can be sustained, no matter how shiny and promising their business model might be.

Secondly, the focus on scale at the early stages of product and business development distracts from producing products that are genuinely adding value to customers. From a circular economy perspective, consumerism has produced negative consequences, with climate change related events being the most threatening. While it is true that we require large-scale game-changing solutions to address these challenges, in many cases the game must be changed in the other direction. In this respect, scaling for scaling’s sake does not necessarily produce the types of value that lead to better social and economic outcomes. For example, Candy Crush can scale but we must reflect genuinely on its value to society.

Finally, many business models cannot scale even though they produce value. In the context of circular economy business models, many, such as industry symbiosis, are by definition more closed. Sustainable tourism is another example – especially because for tourism to be sustainable, visitor traffic must not compromise nature or society. These are examples of important areas of investment that deliver value and potential growth but would not pass through scalability hurdles.

Investors must integrate value and consider talent development in their assessment models.

It is urgent that sustainable start-ups, particularly those that are working to produce value in ways that reduce resources, receive funding to develop – but that scalability should not be a priority when considering whether an emerging enterprise is ready for funding. While scalability is important, it is essential to also evaluate whether founders are open and willing to develop themselves and others and that they are oriented towards creating value for customers and stakeholders. Furthermore, investment approaches that recognize that linear and long-term growth for some business models should be encouraged. This focus will produce stronger companies and more stable returns for investors in the long run. The key is for investors to have the confidence with new approaches.

 SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT

Digitalist Hub home
HOME
MARKETING
work-architecture-building-city-skyscraper-cityscape-686805-pxhere.com
SCALABILITY AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: KEYS TO LONG-TERM BUSINESS SUCCESS
DIGITALIST HUBUPDATED:AUG 9, 2023ORIGINAL:AUG 9, 2023
As a business owner or manager, you know that growth is key to the long-term success of your organization. But not all growth is created equal. To truly thrive, businesses need to focus on sustainable, high growth that is both scalable and sustainable.

WHAT IS SCALABILITY?
Scalability refers to the ability of a business to grow and expand without incurring disproportionate costs or experiencing diminishing returns. A scalable business can grow efficiently and effectively while maintaining profitability and sustainability over the long term.

For example, consider a small retail business that is able to rapidly expand its customer base without incurring significant additional costs. This business is likely to be highly scalable, as it is able to grow efficiently and effectively without sacrificing profitability or sustainability.

On the other hand, consider a business that relies heavily on manual labor or custom-made products. This business may struggle to scale, as the cost of expanding its customer base or product offerings may be prohibitively high.

WHAT IS SUSTAINABLE GROWTH?
Sustainable growth, on the other hand, refers to the ability of a business to grow and expand in an environmentally, socially, and financially sustainable way. A business that can achieve sustainable growth can grow and expand over the long term without negatively impacting its stakeholders or the environment.

BY MARK P. FANCHEROCT 13, 2023
For example, consider a company that can grow its customer base while reducing its environmental impact through renewable energy or sustainable materials. This company is likely to be experiencing sustainable growth, as it is able to expand while also aligning with its values and the needs of its stakeholders.

WHY ARE SCALABILITY AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IMPORTANT?
Both scalability and sustainable growth are important factors for businesses looking to achieve long-term success and drive high levels of growth. By focusing on these factors, businesses can build a solid foundation for efficient and sustainable growth.

Scalability allows businesses to grow efficiently and effectively without incurring significant additional costs or sacrificing profitability. This helps businesses build a strong foundation for long-term growth, as they are able to expand their customer base and product offerings without undermining their financial stability.

On the other hand, sustainable growth helps businesses align their growth efforts with their values and the needs of their stakeholders. By focusing on sustainability, businesses can build long-term relationships with customers and other stakeholders while also contributing to a better world.

Overall, both scalability and sustainable growth are important factors for businesses looking to achieve long-term success and drive high levels of growth. By focusing on these factors, businesses can build a solid foundation for efficient and sustainable growth.

Changes in current business create modern mechanisms for businesses to determine what they aim for and the achievement of their high performance. The ability to maintain high performance becomes a guide for business continuity. The mechanism that can adopt such assumption is a business model that has the ability to generate outcomes in every market situation. Business ventures are continuously aiming at developing feasible business models for solving challenges in the society. The significance of a business model in determining the sustainability and scalability of business performance has been widely acknowledged in the literature. A characteristic that explains the adaptability of a business model is its sustainability and scalability. As factors that ensure efficiency of work, sustainability and scalability can be applied to the concept of a business model as the ability of businesses to maintain higher performance through their operations. The study aims at determining how business model sustainability and scalability interact in different conditions. The study presents the concept of sustainability and scalability with explanations to determine the performance of business. Dwelling on literature on business models and innovation adoption, the study developed a business model built on the triangle of optimization of economic, social, and environmental value. The study applied the business model to Bcomp, a clean-tech venture with the mission of producing of linen-based composite material. The study tested the sustainability and scalability of the business performance and found an interaction between business model sustainability and scalability.

KEYWORDS: Sustainability scalability business models
Sustainability and impact entrepreneurship
There is a growing perception in society that business is expected not only to produce economic value, but also to take part in positive social engagement. It is expected to reduce any negative impact on the environment, and at the same time, to contribute to its regeneration or protection (Evans et al., Citation2017; Schaltegger, Lüdeke-Freund, & Hansen, Citation2016; Stubbs & Cocklin, Citation2008). These expectations are not only a concern for businesses but for whole governments and the economy (Kyriakides, Citation2019) and are putting pressure on entrepreneurs to modify their current business models to replicate a sustainable business model. The sustainable business model aims at creating and delivering economic and social value, while maintaining or regenerating the environment (Elkington, Citation1998; Schaltegger et al., Citation2016). The achievement of these multiple objectives can be seen by entrepreneurs and managers as an opportunity to develop new and innovative business models (Casadesus‐Masanell & Zhu, Citation2013; Lindgardt, Reeves Jr., & Deimler, Citation2015).

Businesses have developed multiple ways to express their interest in sustainability, such as corporate social responsibility (Matten & Moon, Citation2008), sustainable production and consumption (Cohen & Muñoz, Citation2016; Geels, McMeekin, Mylan, & Southerton, Citation2015), and sustainable supply chains (Carter & Rogers, Citation2008; Linton, Klassen, & Jayaraman, Citation2007). However, implementing sustainability on only one or two of these levels is insufficient to implement sustainability deeply enough within the company’s DNA in order to address the challenges of today’s world, such as climate change, limited resources, and pollution (Bocken, Short, Rana, & Evans, Citation2014; Dyllick & Muff, Citation2016). Furthermore, especially when it comes to the products and industries sector, a linear business activity, by its very nature, often goes against some aspect of sustainability (Michelini, Moraes, Cunha, Costa, & Ometto, Citation2017; Stahel, Citation2016).

Impact entrepreneurship is defined by Markman, Waldron, Gianidodis, and Espina (Citation2019, p. 372) as

the development of sustained applications and solutions that collectively address grand challenges to make the world better. Impact entrepreneurs apply economics logic, but they prioritize solving formidable challenges ahead of wealth creation per se. They also use business principles to right environmental, social, and/or economic wrongs and apply science and technology modalities for impact.

An entrepreneur creates a social impact on societies that can be positive or negative. For instance, it can have a positive impact when it creates jobs, pays taxes and supports local development, or it can have a negative impact when it exploits local communities, or encourages child labor or poor working conditions. When it comes to achieving environmental performance, it is less obvious how business can have a positive impact. This is due to an intrinsic opposition between producing—which is an activity that requires natural resources—and preserving the ecosystem (Hart, Citation1995). This view has been broadly studied by scholars but with the rise of concern for more sustainable businesses, the paradigm is slowly shifting. Triple bottom-line sustainability has generated much enthusiasm among practitioners and researchers and from this interest a new paradigm has risen. The so-called circular economy offers the achievement of triple bottom-line sustainability by breaking the old linear economy paradigm (Andersen, Citation2007; Stahel, Citation2016): resources should no longer be used and destroyed but can be reused again and again (Bocken et al., Citation2016; Geissdoerfer, Savaget, Bocken, & Hultink, Citation2017; Ghisellini, Cialani, & Ulgiati, Citation2016).

Business model scalability
Hence, the challenge consists of scaling up a business for economic, social, and environmental performance. However, it is important to mention that the relationship between sustainability and scalability is not mandatorily antagonistic. The three objectives of sustainability can be achieved simultaneously and even when a company scales (Bocken et al., Citation2018). The relationship between the sustainability of a business model and its scalability remains relatively unexplored and constitutes a key strategy for determining the factors that stimulate successful scaling. Bloom and Chatterji (Citation2009) developed organizational capabilities that could foster scaling, with the capabilities being staffing, communications, alliance building, lobbying, generating earnings, replicating, and stimulating market forces. Palomares-Aguirre, Barnett, Layrise, & Husted (Citation2018) proposed a model where integrating engagement with the community is essential, especially for deep scaling at the base of the pyramid. It seems important that private business needs either government collaboration or community engagement for sustainable business models to create systemic change. Thus, I propose the acronym RESCALES, covering the capabilities of replication, earnings generation, stafﬁng, communication, alliance building, lobbying, engagement with the community, and stimulating market forces (see Appendix).

On one hand, radical change in behavior and priorities in companies can only happen slowly, due to the fact that companies still want to concentrate on profit-making. On the other hand, society is changing, and the climate is pushing businesses to change their attitude toward resource consumption and waste management.Footnote1 Therefore, it is crucial for entrepreneurs, managers, and researchers to focus on finding an adequate balance between the three subconcepts of sustainability (Stahel, Citation2006, Citation2019). More and more businesses proclaim their interest in circularity, but they are slow to adapt.

The emergence of start-ups, incubators, and groups that concentrate on bringing the circular economy to life confirm the rise of a general interest in circularity.Footnote2 Changing a firm’s business model so drastically is often arduous, not only due to the investments that have been made in developing and implementing the old linear model, but also because firms are uncertain about where they are going with the new model. It is hard to convince firms that investing in sustainability is profitable in the short term. Research on circular companies is growing, but very few studies look specifically at the link between being a sustainable, circular firm and how scalability is achieved (Bocken et al., Citation2018; Henry, Bauwens, Hekkert, & Kirchherr, Citation2020; Stål & Corvellec, Citation2018).

Bcomp: How a business model`s sustainability and scalability interact
Bcomp, founded in 2011 in Fribourg, Switzerland (http://www.bcomp.ch/about-us/), is a clean-tech company focusing on the production of linen-based composite material. Their aim is to build a new material that is strong enough to endure extreme sports, light enough to be comfortable and flexible enough to absorb all kinds of shocks. The product they have created is lighter than carbon (30% to 50% lighter), more resistant to shock (four times the absorption capacity of carbon), and it does not shatter when broken, which makes it much safer. The company did not stop there. Production of this material is also 100% clean, with 0 g of CO2 emissions, the product is recyclable, and, lastly, it is much cheaper than carbon. Bcomp’s ambition is to replace carbon and glass fiber with their 100% renewable material.

The first is ampliTex®, which is a technical fabric made from natural flax fiber. This product can be produced in 10 variations, depending on the level of flexibility on which the customer would like to focus. This product has been used for summer sport, mainly to produce surfboards and other watersport boards. The second product is bCores®, also one of Bcomp’s key products. Made from an assembly of balsa wood and flax fiber, bCores is the lightest core on the market. Its main characteristic is that it provides not only flexibility and robustness, but also excellent shock absorption. Thanks to these advantages and its light weight, the major applications for this product are found in the ski industry.

The third product is called powerRibs®, and it is probably the product with the biggest potential on the market. It is made from a reinforced linen fillet available in two finishes: dry or molded with recycled Polyethylenterephthalat (PET). The final product is much lighter than other composite materials and also much cheaper. In addition, this component is very efficient in terms of sustainability, CO2 emissions, and recyclability. The powerRibs have attracted great interest from the automotive industry and are available in six variations.

Value proposition
Bcomp’s vision is to become the global standard in lightweight, high-performance, and sustainable materials, offering people the freedom of sports activity and mobility, without compromising the right of future generations to the same. Bcomp’s mission is to replace standard engineering materials by cutting weight and cost. While other lightweight solutions allow weight reduction of benchmark components currently in use, Bcomp offers this value at a lower cost when compared to alternative solutions: making Bcomp both lighter in weight and cheaper in cost (Figure 1). In addition, Bcomp differentiates itself from the high renewable content of their solutions and the deep know-how developed throughout the top-level research and programs (European Space Agency [ESA], Eurostar etc.) that they have conducted since it was founded. These capabilities result in unique customer support through the sampling, prototyping, and scaling-up process they offer customers from project start to production.

Figure 1. Summary of value proposition for Bcomp’s mobility markets

Figure 1. Summary of value proposition for Bcomp’s mobility markets
Display full size
Bcomp selected the sports and leisure industry as its entry market. For a high-tech material start-up, it has the great advantage of low entry barriers and state-of-the-art technology, resulting in short time-to-market for novel technologies, and strong growth in the targeted submarkets. The market is strong in image and storytelling, which has positive spillover effects into other markets. Bcomp’s growth on this market will come from the new generation bCores in the next few years, providing improved performance per price ratio opening, giving access to a broader market, as well as from the ampliTex™ market entry into the surf and yachting industries. The surf industry has grown significantly over the past decades, and end customers are highly eco-conscious, thus willing to paying a premium for sustainable products. Early adopters, like WestCoast Surfboards and Hurricane Surf, have set the trends, followed by global leader, Starboard, which just launched its first product range featuring ampliTex fabrics. More recently, they have explored the yachting industry as a potential new sector, leading to the recent acquisition of the leading brand, Baltic Yachts, as an early adopter.

Three mobility sectors (motorsports, automotive interior, and aerospace interior) have been carefully selected for Bcomp’s market entry, with each of them having very specific characteristics and offering unique synergies not only with the existing business, but also between each other. From a strategic point of view, the motorsports sector is characterized by market dynamics similar to Bcomp’s initial sports and leisure market (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Major achievements during the first 6 years of development of Bcomp

Figure 2. Major achievements during the first 6 years of development of Bcomp
Display full size
With its low entry barriers, short time-to-market, and high technology level, it offers a perfect stepping-stone toward the large-scale automotive industry. In addition, its outstanding technology and marketing platform result in great visibility, not only toward the automotive market, but also toward the initial sports and leisure entry market. For all these reasons, motorsports were selected as Bcomp’s initial entry into the mobility sector.

Customer cases and image transfer from sports and leisure work well for motorsports, as they are powerful teasers for the automotive industry. Important demonstrator cases have been acquired and given proof of concept. Electric GT’s racing-adapted Tesla and the Gillet Vertigo for Pike’s Peak have both raised significant awareness and helped to acquire substantial first customers, such as Porsche Motorsports, Aston Martin Racing, and Audi Sport within only one year. Partnering with and supplying these premium brands have further fueled their legitimacy. In addition, several governing bodies have adapted their rules outlining natural fibers as the required material for specific applications.

The large-scale growth of the automotive interior market has a strong need for lightweight solutions. Since the validation processes are far more challenging than in the motorsports industry, Bcomp has been partnering for several years with leading companies, such as BMW, with the objective to turn these customer development projects into product business by 2021.

This sector has several advantages. In the first place, naural fiber composites are already widely used in interior door panels, which significantly reduce the “mental” entry barrier. Furthermore, the powerRibs™ technology offers a significant weight-saving potential of up to 40%, ranging from the door and front panels, the headliners, seat back panels, all the way to various trunk trim parts. In addition to the light weight, the solutions offer increased safety, since debris is not generated in the event of a crash. From a product maturity perspective, Bcomp has reached a very high level of technology readiness with its powerRibs™ solution for interior applications and works with OEMs to supply companies like Polestar, BMW, or Tesla, to name but a few.

Bcomp has invested in the aerospace interior market since 2014, with funding for several projects from the Swiss Space Office (SSO) and the ESA to develop its powerRibs technology for space applications. It has also established itself as the leading ESA partner for biocomposites in space. In January 2018, Bcomp was awarded a long-term project by ESA within the latter’s Clean Space program. In parallel, Bcomp won the LHT start-up pitch contest in June 2016, marking the start of a development project between the companies.

Space and aerospace both imply very costly and time-consuming material qualification processes to enter the markets. Important technical entry barriers (e.g., linked to fire resistance) still require significant R&D efforts and costly material qualifications. For this reason, Bcomp decided to focus on these two collaborations fully—with ESA for space and LHT for aerospace—rather than developing business with other potential customers in parallel. While ESA collaboration offers a unique platform to test the materials in extreme conditions, it also takes advantage of a powerful marketing tool, generating significant visibility and credibility for other target markets.

Business model
Bcomp acts as a supplier of advanced renewable material solutions, focusing on cutting weight and cost in their customers’ products. In this framework, they support their customers with outstanding and continuous technical support and offer customer-specific product developments with the aim of substituting their customers’ material solutions with Bcomp’s products. The core competencies consist of R&D and Technical Customer Support, Sales & Marketing, and Supply Chain Management.

At its founding in 2011, Bcomp adopted a philosophy of outsourcing its entire production, to keep capital expenditures low at the early stage and focus on what the company does best: develop novel, natural fiber composite products, market them, and sell them. Consequently, Bcomp built strong partnerships with several companies and mastered the required technologies to take care of production. Today, the products are manufactured in different remote production sites: bCores are made by Vöcker, the industrial carpentry company in Germany. AmpliTex and powerRibs products are made by Gerster TechTex, also in Germany, and Hexcel in the United Kingdom. Bcomp buys the required flax yarns and roving, which they have developed and specified with suppliers in Europe. They have these supplies shipped to the production partners free of charge and buy the manufacturing services from them.

Furthermore, Bcomp follows a robust culture of collaborating with academic partners to keep their position within the natural fiber composite field at the forefront of product innovation. Fundamental R&D is generally financed through national and European funding schemes, while they finance customer-specific product developments on their own. As much as Bcomp’s total outsourcing business model has allowed the company to keep a high level of supply-chain agility, it also exposes the company to Intellectual Property (IP) drain and the strategic changes of Bcomp’s production partners. Thus, the company decided to build a pilot plant for the automotive interior market, and ready for production as of Q4-2020. This is important for several reasons: It will allow the production line to develop to its full maturity within the coming months. Bcomp will be able to hold its IP core very close, and it provides a powerful tool with which they can maintain high speed and agility in the innovation process and the way forward. Along with the early adopters (Tesla, Geely Group), Bcomp has targeted vehicle programs and parts that will allow them to serve the programs from this pilot line, respectively, keeping full control of production fine-tuning, quality, and the supply chain. The company will be able to replicate the pilot plant themselves or with selected partners once they need higher-scale production and/or a production footprint in global markets, including China and the United States. However, the current strategy assumes they will scale up production themselves using numerous plants based in Switzerland.

Conclusion
A circular business model is built around the triangle of optimization of economic, social, and environmental value (Stahel, Citation2019), and the business model framework. For example, the nine dimensions by Osterwalder and Pigneur (Citation2010), or Richardson’s (Citation2008) thoughts on value proposition, value creation and delivery, and value capture conceptualizing with circular economy dimensions (De Angelis, Citation2018). The transformation to a circular business model expects companies to work on a new experience curve. Over time, circular models would take some market share from linear business proposed by existing companies who tend to integrate circular dimensions only partially in their operations. Thus, for the transition, a fruitful combination of a circular and linear economy is essential in order to build awareness and to convince the business community to invest in circular economy models. Several categories of circular business models are possible, like on-demand concepts, dematerialization, product life cycle extension or reuse, recovery of secondary raw materials or by-products, products as a service or sharing economy, and collaborative consumption (Charter & McLanaghan, Citation2019). Finally, micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) are the backbone to create a deal flow of circular business projects. Typically, start-ups, spin-offs of big companies, or agile medium-sized companies whose approach is to create entire circular business models with a systemic approach are in demand. From a short-term perspective, innovators and early adopters are the reality for MSMEs with circular business models, but with a clever scaling strategy built on community engagement, public debate, government support, and smart communication, the goal is to get the early majority of the market in the future.

Notes
1 In Switzerland, the government has voted to stop nuclear energy production by 2050 and is taking actions to meet this objective. For instance, the Swiss government has registered a reduction of about 10% of CO2 emissions in 2018 compared to 1990 (Swiss Federal Office of Energy, Citation2018). Finding a way to produce that does not harm the environment, or that even reinforces it, will be the norm for industries and businesses around the globe.

2 For instance, the famous incubator, Impact Hub, has created a specific branch dedicated to the circular economy, called Circular Economy Transition, and large groups, such as Circular Economy Switzerland, have emerged.

Sustainability is critical to a scalable and thriving business. Here's how companies can make it a priority.
Companies are embracing sustainability as a critical investment to realise long-term returns and gain a competitive advantage.
Companies are embracing sustainability as a critical investment to realise long-term returns and gain a competitive advantage.
With governments and businesses around the world pledging and accelerating their commitment towards sustainability, debating whether to incorporate sustainability into business strategy is no longer an option but a priority for businesses. Companies are embracing sustainability as a critical investment to realise long-term returns and gain a competitive advantage.

Prioritising sustainability is a necessity in today’s business environment. It not only reduces the negative impact on the environment but adds brand value, increases efficiency, meets and satisfies customer demands, and creates new opportunities.

For decades, IBM has surveyed thousands of CEOs about their biggest challenges. In the latest survey, sustainability ranked at the top, a five-spot jump from 2021. Nearly 60% of CEOs told us they see significant demand from investors for greater transparency on sustainability. They are also feeling pressure from multiple stakeholders.

Ms Julia Carvalho IBM General Manager for IBM Growth Africa
Ms Julia Carvalho IBM General Manager for IBM Growth Africa
Regulators and governments in most top economies have developed corporate disclosure requirements around environmental impact. Customers want to buy from sustainable businesses and an IBM Consumer Survey found that more than half (51%) of respondents said environmental sustainability is more important to them today than it was 12 months ago. People want to work for and invest in sustainable companies. From the boardroom to the operations centers, all stakeholders want to play a role in making a positive difference.

However, while 86% of companies say they already have a sustainability strategy, only 23% say they are implementing sustainability strategies across their organization. Many organizations with good intentions are stalled at the planning stage because implementing sustainable practices is complex and they don’t know how or where to make an impact. Despite this, the same IBM CEO study found that 80% of CEOs believe investments in sustainability will improve their business results within five years.

 Primary steps to build and operationalize sustainability into organizations
Becoming more sustainable is an opportunity to innovate, make a difference, and grow. Organisations can take action by following these steps:

Define your Sustainability goals. To succeed, your business needs to set and act on clear environmental, social, and governance (ESG) goals, then execute with exceptional data discipline across the enterprise.
Establish your ESG data foundation. Create a clear baseline to underpin every goal from which to determine your current impact, track progress, and implement adjustments. This requires a single system of record to integrate and manage ESG data that aligns to your goals. Collect, correlate, visualize, and analyze relevant data to automate delivery of transparent, verifiable, financial-grade information and identify where improvements are necessary.
Operationalize your sustainability goals. Businesses must also leverage the links between this system of record for ESG data and the underlying operational systems that run across all the departments and business units of your organization. With these links, you can automate feedback loops that enable actions based on insights. These insights help drive sustainable transformation through intelligent facilities and assets, resilient IT infrastructure, and circular supply chains.
Prioritise three key operational areas  
Intelligent facilities and assets. Monitoring and recording operational data from your organization’s physical assets and real estate facilities is a good start. The data you collect can fuel insights to drive energy savings, optimize waste management, and provide predictive maintenance data to help reduce unplanned downtime.
Resilient IT infrastructure. Data centers provide multiple opportunities for improving sustainability. Upgrading IT infrastructure with newer, more energy-efficient equipment can help reduce energy consumption and eliminate wasteful, outdated hardware. Taking steps to improve business resiliency across your organization helps you enhance customer experiences and productivity while you work toward meeting your sustainability goals.
Circular supply chains. Consumers are demanding transparent sourcing data for the products they buy and can reuse. Deploying intelligent workflows and taking advantage of automation opportunities not only reduces waste, but also optimizes fulfillment and delivery paths with lower carbon footprints. Solutions powered by AI and backed by blockchain can help you progress toward a net-zero supply chain.
Conclusion
No one can do this alone. That’s why IBM and its ecosystem partners are developing a portfolio that supports building and operationalizing sustainability. With IBM Technology solutions and IBM Consulting expertise, we help companies set their strategy, harness their ESG data to embed sustainability into the fabric of business, and turn sustainability ambition into action.

Scalability and Robustness of Business Models for 
Sustainability: A Simulation Experiment
Karl Täuscher*
Bayreuth University
Chair of Strategic Management & Organization 
Prieserstraße 2, 95444, Bayreuth, Germany
Leipzig University
Chair of Innovation Management 
Augustusplatz 10, 04109 Leipzig, Germany
Nizar Abdelkafi
Fraunhofer IMW 
Group Business Models: Engineering & Innovation 
Neumarkt 9-19, 04109, Leipzig, Germany
Leipzig University
Chair of Innovation Management, 
Augustusplatz 10, 04109 Leipzig, Germany
Forthcoming in Journal of Cleaner Production. Available online before print:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.09.023
Täuscher, Karl & Abdelkafi, Nizar (2018): Scalability and robustness of business models for 
sustainability: A simulation experiment. Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 170, pp. 654-664.
*Corresponding author. E-mail address: Karl.Taeuscher@uni-bayreuth.de
Scalability and Robustness of Business Models for 
Sustainability: A Simulation Experiment
Abstract
Entrepreneurial ventures increasingly aim at developing viable business models for solving 
societal or ecological challenges. Such business models for sustainability (BMfS) build on 
reinforcing mechanisms of value creation and capture that allow achieving financial and 
sustainability objectives simultaneously. To date, we do not know much about the successful 
design of such business models. This research aims to reduce this gap by experimentally 
exploring their scalability and robustness in different environmental conditions. Rooted in 
the literature on business models and innovation adoption, we develop a simulation model
that integrates various dimensions of BMfS. We apply the simulation to Coursera, an 
entrepreneurial venture with the social mission of making high-quality education globally 
accessible. The simulation allows us to test hypotheses about the venture’s financial and 
sustainability performance over time. We find that the business model is highly scalable but 
shows limited robustness to strong competitive pressure. We derive implications for the
effective design of business models and discuss how the findings contribute to sustainability 
literature.
Keywords
Business Model for Sustainability (BMfS); Entrepreneurial business models; Business 
model analysis; Simulation modeling; System dynamics; innovation diffusion; MOOC
1 Introduction
An increasing number of entrepreneurs aims at developing business models that are not only 
financially viable but also contribute positively to society and the natural environment
(Schaltegger et al., 2016a). Scholars discuss this phenomenon under the labels of 
sustainability business models (Stubbs and Cocklin, 2008), business models for 
sustainability (Schaltegger et al., 2012), business models for sustainable innovation (Boons 
and Lüdeke-Freund, 2013), or sustainable business models (Bocken et al., 2014). These 
concepts commonly refer to business models that integrate a social or ecological value 
proposition at the core of their value creation logic and therefore go beyond adding 
sustainable practices to an otherwise unsustainable business model (Schaltegger et al., 
2016a).
This paper focuses on BMfS developed by entrepreneurial ventures. Entrepreneurship has 
been identified as a potential panacea for a variety of today’s most pressing social challenges 
(Brugmann and Prahalad, 2008; Hall et al., 2010, 2010; Hart and Milstein; Tilley and Young, 
2006). Particularly at early stages of an industry's sustainability transformation, 
entrepreneurial ventures are more likely to pursue sustainability-related opportunities than 
incumbents (Hockerts and Wüstenhagen, 2010). To deliver substantial impact on society, 
such ventures need to develop business models that are scalable (França et al., 2017; 
Jabłoński and Jabłoński, 2016; Lenssen et al., 2012). Among others, a highly scalable 
business model allows firms to scale to neutralize high initial costs of market and 
infrastructure development and to offer goods and services at low profit margins (Lenssen 
et al., 2012).
Very frequently, however, entrepreneurial ventures face high uncertainty regarding market 
adoption or the availability of critical resources (Bocken, 2015; Hall et al., 2010). Consider 
the case of Better Place, a venture that developed an innovative business model for electric 
mobility that centered on battery-swapping services (Noel and Sovacool, 2016). The 
business model required Better Place to expand its capital-intensive infrastructure rapidly.
To achieve this, Better Place raised about a billion US-dollars of external funds. Less than 
three years after its foundation, however, Better Place ceased its operation without creating
any ecological or economic value. The firm struggled with the resistance of critical partners
and low market adoption of electric cars. It proved incapable of dealing with these conditions
(Noel and Sovacool, 2016). Hence, high scalability is not a sufficient criterion to characterize
the effectiveness of a BMfS. In fact, research suggests that business models are effective if 
they are robust to a variety of external conditions (Bouwman et al., 2008b; CasadesusMasanell and Ricart, 2011). While literature provides good insights into what characterizes 
effective BMfS, there is still a dearth of knowledge on how to assess the success criteria. 
This research thus seeks to contribute to the understanding of successful design of BMfS by 
answering a key question: How can we assess the scalability and robustness of an 
entrepreneurial BMfS?
We approach the research question by analyzing the design of BMfS through conceptual 
modeling and simulation experiments. The research builds an integrative simulation model 
for an entrepreneurial BMfS. The simulation model graphically and mathematically 
represents the causal links between the business model’s value dimensions and elements. In 
doing so, the simulation model aims to advance the understanding of the dynamics and 
interdependencies between the success characteristics of such business models and allows 
experimentation with their performance dynamics under different future scenarios.
As a context for this work, we focus on Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). MOOCs 
are considered a sustainable innovation with high potential for contributing towards a highquality education that is accessible and affordable for people around the world (Hoyt, 2014; 
Leckart, 2012; Pappano, 2012; Porter, 2015b). However, the entrepreneurial ventures that 
offer MOOCs are yet to prove the financial viability of their business models (Porter, 2015a).
The research simulates the business model of Coursera, the largest MOOC platform at 
present, to derive insights into its scalability and robustness. Based on the findings in this 
context, we then discuss broader implications for the successful design of entrepreneurial 
BMfS.
2 Theoretical background
2.1 Business models for sustainability (BMfS)
A business model describes a firm’s logic of creating, delivering, and capturing value (Teece, 
2010). While the business model literature provides diverse understandings of the concept, 
many researchers agree that the business model concept integrates (at least) a value creation, 
value delivery and a value capture dimension (Abdelkafi et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2008; 
Osterwalder and Pigneur, 2010; Täuscher and Abdelkafi, 2017; Teece, 2010). The value 
delivery dimension defines the firm’s target customers and how the firm aims to provide 
value to them through a value proposition (Osterwalder and Pigneur, 2010). The value 
creation dimension considers how and with whom the firm creates the value proposition 
(Johnson et al., 2008). The value capture dimension (Teece, 2010) considers the business 
from a financial perspective. It includes decisions on how the firm transforms the created 
value into revenue streams and profits (Chesbrough and Rosenbloom, 2002). The business 
model differs from other units of analysis by its holistic perspective that spans organizational 
boundaries and different systems levels (Zott et al., 2011).
Sustainability researchers have increasingly adopted the business model as a unit of analysis 
to describe and communicate the logic of sustainability-oriented organizations (Adams et 
al., 2016; Arevalo et al., 2011; Bocken et al., 2014; Schaltegger et al., 2016a). This paper
follows the definition of BMfS as formulated by Schaltegger et al. (2016a): “A business 
model for sustainability helps describing, analyzing, managing, and communicating (i) a 
company’s sustainable value proposition to its customers, and all other stakeholders, (ii) 
how it creates and delivers this value, (iii) and how it captures economic value while 
maintaining or regenerating natural, social, and economic capital beyond its organizational 
boundaries”. The definition includes both for-profit and non-profit organizations. Moreover, 
it explicitly relates BMfS to a ‘sustainable value proposition’ and considers the impact of 
business model decisions on the economy, natural environment, and society. While extant 
research has often focused on business models that rely on innovative technologies with 
lower ecological effects in production or consumption (Bohnsack et al., 2014; Bolton and 
Hannon, 2016), the definition equally considers organizations that deliberately create 
societal value. In fact, BMfS should incorporate an additional dimension that represents the 
value proposition to the natural or societal environment (Abdelkafi and Täuscher, 2016). 
Such a societal or ecological value proposition is distinctive from a firm’s value proposition 
to customers. Thus, a BMfS goes beyond the societal value that firms create through their 
core business activities (e.g., job creation) or corporate social responsibility activities. This
understanding is in line with other conceptualizations of BMfS such as those proposed by
Bocken et al. (2014) as well as Boons and Lüdeke-Freund (2013).
The field of sustainable entrepreneurship has shown an increased interest in the design and 
management of business models as a strategic approach to social or ecological value creation 
(Schaltegger et al., 2016b). Literature in this field focuses on commercial organizations that 
aim to solve societal and environmental problems (Schaltegger and Wagner, 2011). Extant 
research has identified innovative business models that create societal wealth (Sánchez and 
Ricart, 2010; Seelos, 2010; Thompson and MacMillan, 2010) and ecological value (Jolink 
and Niesten, 2015). It also investigated how entrepreneurial motives and values influence
the business models (Parrish, 2010), and studied how venture capital can enable and support 
the development of BMfS (Bocken, 2015). Yet, there is a dearth of knowledge on the success 
characteristics and intended outcomes of entrepreneurial BMfS.
2.2 Characteristics and outcomes of effective BMfS
There is no universal understanding of the outcomes of effective business model design. 
Mainstream business model literature has focused on outcomes such as total value creation 
(Amit and Zott, 2001), competitive advantage (Christensen, 2001; Teece, 2010) Teece, 
2010), superior firm performance (Zott and Amit, 2007, 2008; Zott et al., 2011), or captured
value from technology (Chesbrough and Rosenbloom, 2002; Hedman and Kalling, 2003).
The design of BMfS additionally strives for achieving an outcome with an environmental or
societal value (Abdelkafi and Täuscher, 2016; Schaltegger et al., 2016a). This outcome is in 
line with a triple-bottom-line (TBL) approach to performance measurement, as proposed by 
several sustainability researchers (Bocken et al., 2014; Elkington, 1999; Stubbs and Cocklin, 
2008). Wells (2016) mentions that organizational stability can represent another intended 
outcome of BMfS, as BMfS minimizes the organizational changes that might incur 
important social and environmental costs. Thus, the analysis of BMfS requires the 
integration of several performance outcomes.
Literature also dealt with the characteristics of effective business models. Many 
understandings have been proposed in this regard. For instance, Casadesus-Masanell and 
Ricart (2011) argue that business models are effective, if they (a) fit the firm’s strategic 
objectives, (b) build on consistent elements that reinforce each other and enable scalability, 
and (c) exhibit robustness against external threats. Many researchers agreed on the necessity 
of consistent and reinforcing design elements (Amit and Zott, 2012; Demil and Lecocq, 
2010; Demil et al., 2015; Hamel, 2000) and and proposed first models regarding when and 
how business models engender reinforcing feedback loops (Casadesus-Masanell and Ricart, 
2010, 2011; Demil et al., 2015). In contrast, there is not much conceptual knowledge 
available on the design elements that characterize and enable robust business models
(Täuscher and Abdelkafi, 2015). Casadesus-Masanell and Ricart (2007, 2010, 2011) 
consider robustness as the business model’s ability to fend off external threats. Bouwman et 
al. (2008a) take a broader perspective and define robustness as “the ability to cope with 
changes in the business environment […]. Typical examples of external influences are 
changes in user requirements, regulatory changes, emerging new target groups and changing 
scale of operation, the application of a different revenue model or the incorporation of a new
technology” (Bouwman et al. 2008a, p. 132). Scholars have particularly focused on the 
technological, market-related and regulatory risks that affect the robustness of business 
models (Bouwman et al., 2008a; Bouwman et al., 2008b; Reuver et al., 2009). Hence, the
analysis of business model effectiveness requires a conceptual understanding of the feedback 
loop structure that underlies the business model (Casadesus-Masanell and Ricart, 2011) as 
well as an understanding of its behavior under different future scenarios (Reuver et al., 
2013).
The assessment of a BMfS’scalability and robustness is even more challenging since firms 
need to connect their value proposition (to customers) and their societal value proposition in 
a scalable and reinforcing manner. Scaling a firm’s societal value should increase value to 
customers and ultimately the firm’s financial performance. Hence, firms need to overcome
or at least substantially shift the trade-off between sustainability and financial performance
(Abdelkafi and Täuscher, 2016). The subsequent sections propose a simulation model that 
integrates all these complex considerations and report on the simulation results while
focusing on business model scalability and robustness.
3 Modeling a Business Model for Sustainability
3.1 Modeling paradigm and approach
Scholars that investigate sustainability in the context of strategic management and decision
making are often concerned with complex phenomena, in which reliable data are scarce 
(Davis et al., 2007). Thus, simulation modeling is frequently used as a methodology for the 
development, expansion, and testing of theories (Paich and Sterman, 1993; Rahmandad et 
al., 2016; Sterman et al., 2007; Zott, 2003). Simulation modeling provides researchers with 
precise means to explore specific concepts and assumptions from verbal theories (Davis et 
al., 2007) and to study the relation between concepts when empirical data limitations exist 
(Zott, 2003). As such, it is highly suited to develop and test middle-range theories, in 
particular those that relate to longitudinal interactions of different processes or strategic 
trade-offs whose outcomes only unfold over time (Davis et al., 2007). Consequently,
simulation modeling is a promising approach to explore the longitudinal implications that 
are due to the trade-off between BMfS scalability and robustness. As such, it allows us to 
advance the conceptual model of BMfS proposed by Abdelkafi and Täuscher (2016) and to 
generate novel insights into the compound performance outcomes of BMfS.
System Dynamics (SD) is a suited paradigm for the modeling and simulation of complex 
and dynamic systems (Davis et al., 2007). SD modeling principles that consist in 
representing the reinforcing and balancing feedback loops of a system are closely related to 
the idea that “business models are made of concrete choices and the consequences of these 
choices” (Casadesus-Masanel and Ricart, 2010, p, 198). The modeling approach aims at 
advancing the theoretical model and testing it in an application case.
The modeling approach builds on the five-steps process developed by Sterman (2000). First, 
we articulate the model purpose. Second, we develop dynamic hypotheses, formulate the 
assumptions related to the modeled system, and integrate them visually into a conceptual 
model. Third, we transform the conceptual model into a quantitative stock-and-flow model 
that represents the formulated assumptions as a system of mathematical equations. Fourth, 
we test the structural and behavioral validity of the model and conduct the simulation 
experiments. Finally, we derive implications about the potential performance paths of the 
business model and assess its overall robustness.
3.2 Model purpose
The developed simulation model aims at providing a theoretical representation of the core 
causal structure of a BMfS, simulating its future financial and sustainability performance,
and experimentally testing its robustness. The model is based on the conceptual model 
proposed by Abdelkafi and Täuscher (2016) and aims at representing a structure of an 
entrepreneurial BMfS. The model is applied and calibrated to the case of Coursera. 
Coursera is a platform provider of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). Andrew Ng 
and Daphne Koller, two professors at Stanford, founded the venture in 2012 with the mission
to “provide universal access to the world’s best education” (coursera.org). The firm partners 
with universities to provide their courses digitally via its online platform to learners around 
the world. The academic entrepreneurs aimed to solve two highly pressing social issues. On 
the one hand, the cost of education in the US – their country of residence – continues to 
increase. A four-year degree now costs up to 160.000 US-dollars for a student. As a 
consequence, young adults increasingly face enormous debts when leaving their academic 
careers (Casadesus-Masanell and Kim, 2013). On the other hand, they considered the global
inequalities in having access to high-quality education as one of the biggest social 
challenges. With their engineering background, the founders recognized this opportunity and 
the related social value that would result from digitizing the educational content of the 
world’s best universities and providing it to learners around the world free of charge via an 
efficient web-based and mobile platform. Co-Founder Ng explained the rationale that “most 
people will never have access to a Princeton, Stanford, Cal Tech class. But now, if you wake 
up tomorrow morning and you decide to take a Cal Tech class, […] you can just sign up for 
one and it’s free” (PBS Newshour, 2013).
Three patterns characterize Coursera’s business model. First, the firm uses a Freemium 
model, emphasizing that its courses will always be freely accessible. To generate revenues, 
it offers complementary products and services such as verified certificates. Since 2015, the 
firm further offers pre-defined course bundles on topics like “Data Science” – so-called 
Specializations – that include a series of related courses, a final project, and controlled 
exams. To receive a certified degree in these specifications, learners have to pay a tuition 
fee. Second, the firm outsources the course creation and teaching to leading universities that 
enter long-term partnerships with Coursera. These universities primarily expect branding 
and reputation benefits from participation (Porter, 2015a). As a financial incentive, Coursera
shares 6 to 15% of the course revenues with these universities. Third, the firm relies on the 
business model pattern of self-customization (Zhang et al., 2015). As a technology firm, 
Coursera creates value through the design and engineering of the technological platform, 
which contains sophisticated search and recommender systems. Also, Coursera’s employees 
actively develop a community around its Courses by engaging learners and developing tools 
to facilitate their social interaction among each other (Casadesus-Masanell and Kim, 2013).
The business model thus offers its free users and paying customers a self-customized 
learning experience by gathering educational content from partner universities and 
delivering the content through a modern online learning platform.
We select the Coursera case for several reasons. Coursera represents an entrepreneurial 
venture – founded by academics – that has a strong social mission but simultaneously 
pursues financial goals. This focus on hybrid objectives can be seen both as an enabler and 
consequence of the BMfS. Operating Coursera’s business model in the start-up and early 
growth phases required cash from external funding sources. The decision of raising funds 
from venture capital to support of its growth targets, in turn, requires Coursera to achieve
scalability and eventually profitability. We also select the case for its innovativeness and 
societal impact potential. MOOCs have a high potential for contributing to a more equal and 
accessible system of higher education (Porter, 2015a). Due to the high uncertainty about the 
future market adoption of MOOCs and the competitive dynamics (Porter, 2015b), it provides 
an ideal case for this research. In fact, research and the general public see that the future of 
MOOCs strongly depends on whether their providers can develop a viable business model 
(Fischer, 2014; Porter, 2015a). To date, it is difficult to predict whether Coursera’s business 
model would be viable in the long run after the venture ceases to receive venture capital 
funding (Porter, 2015a). As such, the case can provide valuable insights into the design, 
characteristics, and performance of BMfS that strive for the creation of societal value.
3.3 Conceptual model and dynamic hypotheses
The performance of innovative business models is influenced by a complex set of causes
and consequences (Täuscher and Chafac, 2016). Following the specific purpose of this 
research, we focus on the causes and consequences that have high relevance in regards to 
the research questions. Based on the conceptual model proposed by Abdelkafi and Täuscher 
(2016), we develop hypotheses by identifying whether and how Coursera’s business model 
generates a reinforcing feedback loop that strengthens four dimensions of value: the 
delivered value to customers, the delivered societal value, the captured value by the firm, 
and the firm’s value creation capacity. Abdelkafi and Täuscher (2016) suggest that these four 
dimensions are connected to each other via one or more of five business case drivers for 
sustainability proposed by Schaltegger et al. (2012): reputation, sales and margins, employer 
attractiveness, cost reduction, or risk reduction. The business case drivers should provide the 
rationale that causally connects the societal value creation to the firm’s value capture 
(Abdelkafi and Täuscher, 2016).
To identify the link between societal value creation and value capture, we need to define a 
measure for the value that Coursera delivers to society. There exists considerable uncertainty 
about how to quantify the societal value created by MOOCs (Fischer, 2014). Because the
perceived societal value strongly depends on the learner’s characteristics (Kizilcec and 
Schneider, 2015), motivations (Hew and Cheung, 2014), and the learning context (Barak et 
al., 2016), an objective operationalization of the perceived value from MOOCs is rather 
difficult. For simplicity, we use the number of learners that use the free offering of the 
platform (‘users’) and the accumulated amount of courses taken by these learners (‘total 
course enrollments’) as proxies for societal value creation. In line with the venture’s social 
mission, the model measures Coursera’s societal value creation by the number of courses it 
delivers for free to learners around the world.
Next, we explore the business case drivers for sustainability that connect Coursera's business 
model dimensions. Freemium business models build on the expectation of converting a 
fraction of the free users into paying customers (Wagner et al., 2014). The more free users
the venture serves, the larger is the pool of potentially paying customers. Thus, Coursera’s 
societal value proposition of free course enrollments enhances its value capture potential via 
the business case driver of (increased) sales. Further, a bigger network of free users can act 
as a signal for content quality, thus increasing the legitimacy of Coursera’s offering. As new 
ventures in newly emerging markets often face a lack of legitimacy (Wang et al., 2017), the 
growth in network size can further increase sales. All other being equal, more free users 
augment the number of paying customers and consequently increases the level of captured 
value (revenues, profit), thus raising the value creation capacity (partners, course selection)
and ultimately reinforcing the societal value proposition. On the right-hand side of figure 1, 
there is a reinforcing and a balancing feedback loop. The reinforcing feedback loop
encompasses all four dimensions of BMfS. The balancing feedback loop results from the 
increased costs of serving free users. Every free user therefore equally increases the societal 
value creation, but also incurs costs to the firm. While the costs for streaming online lectures 
and engaging with the learning material are negligible, they nevertheless represent a 
balancing feedback loop.
Figure 1: Reinforcing feedback loops generated by Coursera’s business model
The left-hand side of figure 1 represents the feedback loops from the increased adoption of 
Coursera’s platform. The causal structure uses the innovation adoption model as formulated 
by Bass (Bass, 1969) and applied in a variety of innovation adoption and diffusion studies. 
The loop shows that Coursera attracts new users through viral adoption, in other words
existing users telling non-users about the platform (Casadesus-Masanell and Kim, 2013). 
Hence, the reinforcing feedback loop of viral user adoption is an essential driver of the firm’s 
user adoption. Adoption models in system dynamics further include a balancing loop of 
market saturation that depicts the effect of decreasing contacts between users and non-users 
as the number of non-users decreases over time.
Knowledge about the behavior of complex systems helps to develop testable hypotheses 
about Coursera’s business model. SD research has identified that feedback loops represent
a major driver of non-linear behavior of complex systems (Ford, 1999; Morecroft, 2015). 
SD scholars thus study the behavior of complex systems with particular feedback loop 
combinations to identify generic behavioral patterns. Rather than forecasting the exact 
performance of a system, the non-linear performance dynamics are anticipated through the 
identification of a system’s feedback loop structure (Forrester, 1971; Forrester, 1976; Senge, 
1994). In turn, observing a particular behavior of a system can also provide information 
about its feedback loop structure (Sterman, 2000). For instance, a system that exhibits an 
exponential growth trajectory is an indicator that the system is dominated by at least one 
strong reinforcing feedback loop. A system characterized by multiple feedback loops often
shows more complex behavioral patterns. These include S-shaped growth curves or a pattern
of ‘Overshoot and Collapse,' where a critical resource is fueling a rapid growth phase in a 
non-sustainable manner. When such a critical resource has depleted, it eventually causes the 
entire system to collapse. To develop our understanding about the scalability and robustness 
of Coursera’s business model, we can thus test the impact of the reinforcing feedback loops. 
Based on these insights from System Dynamics, we formulate hypothesis 1 in regards to the 
performance trajectory of the societal value creation:
H1: Coursera’s societal value creation follows an exponential growth trajectory over the 
medium-term horizon.
Coursera operates in a new and dynamic market, in which the user adoption and competitive 
dynamics are difficult to predict. As such, an effective business model should be robust under 
alternative environmental conditions. To test the robustness of the overall business model, 
we assess the robustness of Coursera’s performance under different scenarios. Hence, we 
formulate hypothesis 2 and 3:
H2: The sustainability performance of Coursera’s business model is robust under different 
future scenarios.
H3: The financial performance of Coursera’s business model is robust under different future 
scenarios.
The subsequent simulation modeling process transforms the conceptual causal-loop model 
into a software-based stock-and-flow model, in which we can test the formulated 
hypotheses.
3.4 Simulation model
The simulation modeling follows the qualitative and mathematical guidelines proposed by 
Sterman (2000). Sterman (2001) provides a management-oriented introduction to the 
notation of stock-and-flow simulation models and to the complementary mathematical 
equation modeling. The simulation model consists of several modules connected by the 
conceptually developed feedback loops (figure 1). We develop modules for each of the 
conceptual value dimensions. The value creation module represents Coursera’s key 
resources (partner universities, course selection, employees) as stocks. Also, the value 
creation module models Coursera’s cost structure in dependence of user adoption and 
platform usage as well as the course selection. Next, the value capture module integrates the 
different cost drivers and revenue streams from other modules to calculate Coursera’s 
financial performance (operating income). The value capture module further depicts the 
venture’s cash as a stock that additionally considers the financial resources received through 
venture capital. As an alternative measure for the firm’s financial success, we integrate a 
stock that calculates the created financial value as a measure of the accumulated cash minus 
the received venture capital funding. A customer module represents the value delivered to 
free users and paying customers. The module calculates the conversion rate from free users 
to paying customers as a consequence of the relative satisfaction of free users with 
Coursera’s offering. It builds on two dynamic effects: Coursera’s relative price advantage in 
comparison to competitors and the advantage from increased course selection. Both effects 
rely on empirical data from research in the area of MOOCs and markets for digital content 
products (Brynjolfsson et al., 2011; Doerr et al., 2010; Huanhuan and Xu, 2015; Smith et al., 
2002). The number of users further depends on the user adoption dynamics from virality and 
marketing. Usually, innovation adoption literature assumes a fixed number of potential 
adopters. As potential users of MOOCs only require internet access, we assume that the stock 
of potential adopters increases proportionally with the global internet penetration. We build 
on previous simulation models (Oliva et al., 2003; Täuscher and Chafac, 2016) to model the 
dynamic user adoption and internet penetration. The full stock-and-flow simulation model 
is depicted in appendix A.
3.5 Data gathering and model validation
We calibrate the model with data from 2012 (the venture’s foundation) to mid-2016. Since 
the firm is privately owned, it is not required to publish financial statements. Hence, we rely
on multiple sources for estimating the model’s key parameters. These include a case study 
(Casadesus-Masanell and Kim, 2013), published research articles on MOOCs (Hew and 
Cheung, 2014; Hoxby, 2014; Hoyt, 2014; Porter, 2015a), news articles, press releases,
industry reports, and own market analyses.
1
To test the validity of the simulation model, we follow established approaches from SD as 
described in the literature (Barlas, 1996; Sterman, 2000). Besides a variety of behavioral 
model tests, we further conduct a workshop with business model scholars to test the 
structural validity of the model. To test the model’s reliability as to whether the model
accurately represents Coursera’s performance trajectory until 2016, we compare the 
simulated trajectory with the available data points regarding the number of users and offered 
courses. Figure 2 depicts the differences between the simulated and the actual trajectories 
for the internet population growth as well as Coursera’s number of users and courses. In 
addition, we compare the global internet penetration in the model with the real-world 
development. Evidently, internet penetration and other dynamics at a global level rely on a 
long data history, allowing for a better fitting performance than the fitting performance of 
the data regarding the dynamics at a firm-level (firm’s foundation in 2012). As growth rates 
of fast-growing ventures in dynamic and uncertain environments are rather unpredictable 
 
1 The first author is currently engaged in a research study that empirically analyzes the business model changes and 
ecosystem dynamics of the entire population of MOOC platforms over time.
(Delmar et al., 2003), these comparisons primarily illustrate the short-term reliability of the 
model. We calibrate the model with data available in 2015 and validate the model with data 
in mid-2016. Thus, this period can be regarded as a model validation phase. For the 
validation period, the graphs show a good prediction in the growth of users and courses. 
Recall, however, that the model is not intended to predict performance, but rather reveal 
performance patterns under alternative scenarios. We confirm the validity of the model by 
testing whether it demonstrates non-linear behavior as conceptually developed. In addition, 
we execute various simulation tests with extreme parameter values to test the sensitivity of 
the model and the plausibility of its behavior.
Global internet penetration (annual data points)
Total number of courses
Data based on diverse public sources
Total number of users
Data based on (Casadesus-Masanell and Kim, 2013)
Figure 2: Comparison of the simulated and actual data for three variables
4 Simulation results
4.1 Base case simulation of BMfS
To test hypothesis 1, we run a base case simulation that represents the venture’s performance 
with the best estimates for each of the parameter values. Figure 3 shows three measures that 
represent value creation (course selection), societal value delivery (total course 
enrollments), and value capture (operating income) from the venture’s first (2012) to the 
tenth’s year of operations (2021). We do not include the value delivered to customers (i.e. 
the users that pay for additional services) as we are primarily interested in exploring the 
dynamics of the sustainability performance (societal value delivery) and the firm’s financial 
performance (value capture).
Figure 3: Simulated growth trajectory for Coursera’s base case assumptions
The figure shows that a societal value creation, measured by the total course enrollments,
follows an exponential growth curve trajectory. This confirms hypothesis 1. Societal value 
creation is driven by a strong reinforcing feedback loop and is therefore highly scalable. The 
reinforcing feedback loops of virality and the conceptualized value loop (figure 1) both drive 
this exponential growth.
Coursera’s course selection, representing its value creation capacity, grows in a slightly Sshaped, but almost linearly over the simulated period. An S-shaped growth curve indicates 
that a reinforcing feedback loop is counter-acted by a balancing feedback loop. On the one 
hand, the value loop increases the incentives for universities to create and deliver more
courses on Coursera. As such, it represents positive same-side network effects. On the other 
hand, a university has a lower incentive to create a new course on a specific subject, if several 
similar courses already exist on the platform. As such, this negative same-side network effect 
– between universities – decreases the incentives for new course creation and counteracts 
the increased incentives from cross-side network effects. Such competing network effects 
have been observed in a variety of multi-sided platforms, in which producers of 
complementary goods compete to sell (or deliver free goods) to users on the other side of 
the market (Adner and Kapoor, 2010; Boudreau and Jeppesen, 2015; Shankar and Bayus, 
2003; Zhu and Iansiti, 2012). Related research on multi-sided platforms has hypothesized 
that the strength of these opposing effects can explain and predict the changing level of 
activity of these independent participants (Boudreau and Jeppesen, 2015).
Financial performance – represented by the operating income – follows a more complex 
pattern over the first years. Except for a slightly positive value in period 4, the model 
suggests that the venture only starts generating a positive operating income after period 7. 
This specific pattern is a consequence of different underlying effects. Coursera only starts to 
generate substantial revenue in the third period. Interestingly, the operating income even 
declines in the subsequent periods (representing the years 2013 to 2017). The specific 
structure of the firm’s key cost drivers can explain these dynamics. The overhead costs 
primarily depend on the firm’s number of employees. The employment growth, which is 
modeled by using available data points, suggests that the number of employees initially grew 
at a faster rate than in the later periods. Also, the costs for the initiation of new partnerships 
with universities and the annual cost of managing a course (e.g., updating course 
information) follow an almost linear growth curve and therefore affect the operating income
over-proportionally in the first periods when revenue is small. Besides, the costs per course
per user (primarily the costs for video streaming) grow proportionally with the number of 
course enrollments, also affecting the firm’s operating income. When many users are taking 
courses, but only a few are converting into paying customers, the operating costs might grow 
at an over-proportional level.
The base case simulation allows for a better understanding of how different reinforcing 
feedback loops interact and mutually drive the selected measures of value creation, societal 
value delivery, and value capture. Table 1 summarizes the insights from the base case 
simulation. To generate insights into the robustness of the BMfS, we subsequently run 
simulation experiments under alternative scenarios.
Dimension Measure Growth 
dynamic
Reinforcing growth drivers
Societal value 
creation 
Total course 
enrollments
Exponential 
growth
▪ Strong reinforcing feedback 
loops – based on viral and 
marketing-based diffusion –
lead to rapid adoption of the 
platform 
▪ The value loop reinforces the 
platform’s value to free users in 
every period. Higher value leads 
to increased repeat transactions, 
recommendations, and retention
Value creation Course 
selection
S-shaped 
growth curve
▪ Cross-side network effects 
(from learners) reinforce 
universities’ incentives to create 
courses
▪ Negative same-side network 
effects between universities 
represent a balancing feedback 
loop and thus counter-act growth
Value capture Operating 
income
Low 
performance 
until period 7, 
rapid growth
afterward
▪ Rapid growth of user base 
proportionally increases the 
number of paying customers 
▪ The Value loop increases the 
conversion from free users to 
paying customers
▪ Rising profit margin due to high 
fixed costs and low marginal 
costs
Table 1: Summary of the results of the base case simulation of BMfS
4.2 Simulation of BMfS under alternative scenarios
To test the hypotheses 2 and 3, we develop three scenarios; each focuses on a different threat
to the business model. As identified in the literature review on business models, threats to a 
business model can arise from unexpected market developments, competitive dynamics, 
firm’s operational efficiency, as well as changes in the regulatory or technological 
environment. We choose to develop scenarios that incorporate changes in the market, 
competition, and the firm’s operations, and describe how they differ from the base case 
simulation:
▪ Low market adoption: In the scenario, the global internet penetration rates slow down, a 
smaller share of internet users is interested in online learning, and potential users are less 
likely to try the platform once they learn about its existence.
▪ High competition: New competitors enter the market with average course prices below 
those of Coursera. Online learners can simultaneously enroll in courses and degrees from 
different online learning platforms. The increase in competition decreases both the 
conversion of free users into paying customers and the purchase frequency of Coursera’s 
paying customers. The increased competition further leads to a decline in Coursera’s 
gross profit margins, since competitors compete more aggressively (through higher 
commission rates) to get leading universities involved in their platforms as course 
creators. 
▪ Low operational efficiency: Due to technological challenges, Coursera incurs much 
higher variable costs for offering hosting and streaming courses to users. The scenario 
further assumes higher fixed costs per course and higher marketing costs for acquiring 
new users.
Total Course Enrollments
Operating Income
Figure 4: Simulation results for financial and sustainability performance in base case and alternative 
scenarios
Figure 4 shows the firm’s financial and sustainability performance for the three alternative 
scenarios. The growth curves suggest that the venture can grow its societal value 
exponentially despite unfavorable conditions. This supports hypothesis 2. The different 
conditions affect, however, the speed at which Coursera can scale the business and 
create the societal value.
Figure 5 further presents two key metrics that help explain the differences between the
scenarios. The left-hand side represents total potential users, i.e. the fraction of people with 
internet access and who are potentially interested in Courera’s offering but do not yet use 
the service. The graph shows that the stock of potential users is at a much lower level in the 
low market adoption scenario. The graph underlines that a firm’s target market has a 
substantial impact on its scalability. The large market of potential online learners allows 
reinforcing user adoption over the simulated period. While the firm delivers substantial 
societal value in the simulated period, the growth curve of course enrollments will likely 
decline shortly afterward since the low market size acts as a balancing feedback loop. 
Innovation adoption models generally show how saturation of a market acts as a powerful 
balancing feedback loop. Once market saturation has reached a certain level, it will tip the 
exponential growth curve towards an S-shaped growth curve (Bass, 1969; Mäkinen et al., 
2014). Thus, a lower number of potential users decreases the rate at which societal value 
creation increases and also limits the scalability of the business model. Nevertheless, the 
firm can deliver substantial societal value across all simulation experiments in the 
considered time horizon.
Figure 5: Simulation results for total potential users and net revenue
The right-hand side of figure 5 presents net revenues as an additional metric for the firm’s 
financial performance. Net revenues are the key driver for operating income and thus provide 
additional information about the financial performance over time. The figure shows that in 
the high competition scenario, revenues are growing at a very low level. Also, the figure 
shows how revenues in the low market adoption scenario seem to approach a threshold. This 
supports the finding that these scenarios would likely threaten the financial performance of 
the business model. In summary, we find that the business model’s sustainability 
performance is robust to different scenarios but that an unfavorable scenario could threaten 
the survival of the business. While the business model can deal with low operational 
performance and a low market growth, it is highly sensitive to the emergence of strong 
competitors. 
5. Discussion and conclusions
The research contributes to the literature on Business Models for Sustainability in several 
ways. First, it provides a conceptual model that reveals the complex relationships between 
the firm’s BMfS, its environment, and the firm’s sustainability and financial performance. 
The firm’s financial and sustainability objectives can be achieved if the business model
engenders reinforcing feedback loops between the firm’s value creation, value capture, and 
value delivered to its stakeholders (Abdelkafi and Täuscher, 2016). The findings confirm 
that digital platform business models are highly conducive for growth (Taeuscher and 
Laudien, 2017) as they engender positive cross-side network effects (Hagiu and Wright, 
2015). Yet, different feedback loops can limit the scalability and growth potential of such 
business models. Second, our study provides a more nuanced analysis of entrepreneurial 
BMfS. The case of Better Place has shown that the business model innovativeness and 
potential contribution to sustainability goals are not enough. To be successful, a BMfS needs 
to be economically sustainable. Especially in turbulent and uncertain environments, a key 
characteristic of a successful BMfS is its robustness against changes in the environment. In 
this vein, the findings can shift the academic discussion towards a more balanced view of 
opportunities and threats of BMfS. Third, the research advances the understanding of the 
link between business models and sustainability. The simulation model builds upon and 
extends the conceptual assertion that effective BMfS generates a reinforcing feedback loop 
between the sustainable value creation and the firm’s value capture. In other words, the more 
value is created and delivered to the customer, the higher the firm’s contribution to the 
sustainability targets (Abdelkafi and Täuscher, 2016). The simulation experiments show that
effective business model design can lead to increased sustainability and financial 
performance over time. As such, effective business models can overcome – or at least 
substantially shift – the perceived trade-off between financial and sustainability performance
(Schaltegger and Synnestvedt, 2002). Designing such BMfS, therefore, allows ventures to 
enter a virtuous circle of ‘doing good’ and ‘doing well.'
We further contribute to design-driven business model literature that explores the link 
between particular design patterns and performance outcomes. Research has argued that 
multi-sided business models are more scalable when they fulfill three design patterns:
outsourcing activities with high costs (Täuscher, 2016), providing a self-customized value 
proposition to users (Zhang et al., 2015), and enabling a flexible adaptation of value creation 
capacity through modular design (Stampfl et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2015). Coursera’s 
business model integrates all three design patterns. The simulation experiments 
demonstrated that a multi-sided business model like Coursera can be highly scalable, but is 
rather sensitive to dynamics in the firm’s environment. In detail, the societal value creation 
is robust in all three scenarios, whereas financial performance is not, in particular when 
competition is high. Our simulation provides the first illustration of how these patterns
mutually drive or inhibit a business model’s scalability and ultimately its firm performance.
The simulation model can serve future research as a platform for testing a variety of related 
questions and hypotheses. While the simulation model is calibrated to fit the Coursera’s case, 
its general feedback loop structure can be used as a generic model of entrepreneurial BMfS. 
Future research can test, among others, the performance implications of potential changes to
the business model. Also, the simulation model contributes to the design-oriented 
sustainability research by providing managers a tool for low-cost business model 
experimentation. In particular, the simulation-based approach can be used as a management 
tool to stress-test the performance of a BMfS under different assumptions. According to 
Johnson et al. (2008) “successful new businesses typically revise their business models four 
times or so on the road to profitability.” Hence, a simulation model enables managers to 
conduct computer experiments on their business models to identify the best setup for their 
businesses by anticipating different future scenarios, potentially saving them capital and time 
resources. Furthermore, the research contributes to the existing literature on sustainable 
entrepreneurship by integrating the business model with an innovation adoption perspective 
that opens up a new perspective on growth and performance trajectories of sustainabilityoriented ventures. The simulation showed how business models engender feedback loops 
and how these feedback loops become the engines that drive a venture’s growth trajectory. 
Hence, this research explores the interdependencies between business models and growth, 
an issue that has been largely neglected in the business model literature. Although 
sustainability has been at the focus of this work, the generated insights contribute to general 
business model research as well. 
This work is not without limitations. The business model as a unit of analysis can be highly 
insightful; yet, its performance depends on a variety of factors within the firm, its ecosystem, 
and the larger socio-economic and technological environment. While the simulation model 
has included key environmental aspects such as the global internet adoption, there are other
factors that influence the business model performance. The quantitative simulation results 
should therefore be considered as illustrative rather than predictive. Besides, the simulation 
model operationalizes the societal value creation based on the free units they have served to 
users. Future research could combine the model with formal measurement approaches and 
indices developed within the sustainability management literature. Finally, the simulation 
model treats BMfS as unchanged over the simulation period. In practice, entrepreneurs can 
frequently adapt their business models to reflect unexpected changes in the environment or 
within the firm. Future research can complement our research to explore whether certain 
design configurations of BMfS are more easily adaptable than others, and how this 
influences the importance of the business model robustness. Finally, we encourage future 
research to utilize and expand upon the presented simulation model. As it represents one of 
the first formal models of a multi-sided platform, it can enable researchers to explore how 
such complex business models create and capture value over time.


Understanding Scalability and 
Sustainability in Mobile Learning:
A Systems Development Framework 

Acta Wexionensia 
No 192/2009 
Computer Science 
Understanding Scalability and 
Sustainability in Mobile Learning:
A Systems Development Framework 
Anna C. Wingkvist 
Växjö University Press 
Understanding Scalability and Sustainability in Mobile Learning: A Systems Development Framework. Thesis for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, 
Växjö University, Sweden 2009. 
Series editor: Kerstin Brodén 
ISSN: 1404-4307 
ISBN: 978-91-7636-687-5 
Printed by: Intellecta Infolog, Göteborg 2009 
Abstract
Wingkvist Anna C. (2009). Understanding Scalability and Sustainability in Mobile Learning: A Systems Development Framework. Acta Wexionensia, No. 
192/2009, ISSN: 1404-4307, ISBN: 978-91-7636-687-5. Written in English. 
The rapid development of mobile technologies combined with access to content 
almost everywhere and every time allows people to experience new situations 
regarding learning in a wide variety of situations. Mobile learning brings the 
promise of learning “on the move” by allowing learners to take control over time 
and space, thus making learning “more natural”. The field of mobile learning has 
rapidly evolved in the last ten years and many initiatives have been conducted 
worldwide. However, research results indicate that few of these efforts have produced any lasting outcomes. It is evident that these initiatives are faced with inherently complex settings and that the outcomes might not live up to their promises; will not be adopted and, hence, will not become sustainable. 
Many of the complex issues faced by mobile learning initiatives are similar to those faced by the development of information systems. This latest statement suggests that an improved development practice might hold one piece of 
the key to sustainable mobile learning. The aim of the research presented in this 
thesis is to investigate the relation between information systems development 
practice and mobile learning development; and if methods and models originated 
within information systems development can be used to strengthen mobile learning initiatives. In order to investigate this relation, this thesis studies several mobile learning initiatives with a particular focus on how and why development and 
research was initiated and conducted. Concepts found in mobile learning practices are strengthened by providing a theoretical perspective with roots in information systems development. The outcomes of the studies presented in this thesis indicate that the development practice of mobile learning initiatives can be 
redefined in order to achieve more sustainable results. 
The core of this thesis consists of eight peer-reviewed scientific publications that have been presented at different international conferences. Five of the 
papers explore the field of mobile learning and its practice while the other three 
publications present the central ideas that serve as the basis for the proposed 
framework, how it has been developed, and the motivations behind its creation. 
The main contribution of this thesis is a novel development framework 
aimed at researchers and practitioners in the field of mobile learning. The framework defines the life-cycle of a mobile learning initiative and identifies the 
importance of emphasizing the concepts of scalability and sustainability during 
the development process. This may be a way to reduce the complexity inherent 
to mobile learning and its settings, and a means to improve the outcomes of coming mobile learning initiatives in terms of long lasting usable results. 
Keywords: information systems, mobile learning, scalability, sustainability, systems development 


Contents
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Problem definition and motivation ............... 4
1.2 Research Questions . . ...................... 5
1.3 Limitations ............................ 6
1.4 Organization of the Thesis .................... 6
2 Theoretical Foundation 9
2.1 Development of Computer-Based Systems ........... 9
2.2 Information Systems Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.3 Mobile Learning Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4 Conceptual Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.5 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3 Methodological Considerations 19
3.1 Interpretative Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2 Research Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3 The Research Process Explained . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4 The Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4 Overview of Research Efforts 29
4.1 Publication I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2 Publication II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3 Publication III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4 Publication IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.5 Publication V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.6 Publication VI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.7 Publication VII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.8 Publication VIII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.9 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5 Discussion 37
5.1 Current Research in Mobile Learning in Terms of Development Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2 Relating Mobile Learning and Information Systems Development Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3 Mobile Learning Development Supported by Information Systems Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4 Contributing Back to Researchers and Practitioners in Mobile Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6 Conclusions 51
6.1 Main Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.2 Future Research Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Bibliography 55
ix
I Podcasts as a Supplement in Tertiary Education: An Experiment With Two Computer Science Courses 65
7.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7.2 Podcasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.3 Using Podcasts in Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.4 Podcasts at Other Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.5 Podcasting Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
7.6 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
II Thinking Ahead in Mobile Learning Projects: A Survey on
Risk Assessment 79
8.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
8.2 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
8.3 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
8.4 Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
8.5 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
8.6 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
III Addressing Sustainability for Research Initiatives in Mobile Learning through Scalability 101
9.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
9.2 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
9.3 An Evolutionary Life Cycle Model for a Mobile Learning Research Initiative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
9.4 The Property of Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
9.5 Achieving Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
9.6 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
9.7 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
IV Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process
in Mobile Learning 117
10.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
10.2 Theoretical Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
10.3 Reaching Sustainability Through Understanding Scalability . 121
10.4 The Action in Action Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
10.5 The Development Process of the Podcast Initiative . . . . . . 124
10.6 Bringing Forth a Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
10.7 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
10.8 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
10.9 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
x
V A Meta-model Describing the Development Process of Mobile Learning 141
11.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
11.2 A Meta-model for Development of Mobile Learning . . . . . . 144
11.3 Using the Meta-model to Analyze a Podcasting Initiative . . 149
11.4 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
11.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
VI Dealing with Stakeholders in Mobile Learning: A Study
of Three Initiatives 157
12.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
12.2 Theoretical Foundations of the Development Process and Dealing with Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
12.3 Overview of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
12.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
12.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
VII Sharing Experience from Three Initiatives in Mobile Learning: Lessons Learned 177
13.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
13.2 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
13.3 The Three Mobile Learning Initiatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
13.4 Discussion of The Three Mobile Learning Initiatives . . . . . 183
13.5 Sharing Experience by Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
13.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187
VIII Current Practice in Mobile Learning: A Survey of Research Method and Purpose 191
14.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
14.2 Research Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
14.3 Research Purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
14.4 Classification of Mobile Learning Research . . . . . . . . . . . 200
14.5 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
14.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
14.7 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
xi

List of Figures
3.1 The Research Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2 The Iterative Cycles of Action Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.1 A Socio-Technical System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2 An Extended Socio-Technical System for Mobile Learning . . . . 40
5.3 Focus on the Social Area of Concern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.4 The Life-Cycle and the Areas of Concern . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.1 Leavitt’s Diamond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
9.1 The Evolution of a Mobile Learning Initiative . . . . . . . . . . . 105
9.2 The Propagation of Effects due to Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
9.3 Scaling According to Pre-set Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
10.1 The Iterative Cycle of Action Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
10.2 The Stages of a Mobile Learning Initiative . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
10.3 The Areas of Concern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
10.4 The Development of a Mobile Learning Initiative . . . . . . . . . 130
11.1 The Areas of Concern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
11.2 Focus on the Social Area of Concern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
11.3 Focus Changes Throughout the Life Cycle of an Initiative . . . . 148
12.1 Dealing with Stakeholders in the Development Process . . . . . . 170
14.1 Papers Divided by Environment (left) and Method (right) in
Percentage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
xiii

List of Tables
5.1 Research Questions in Relation to Publications . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2 The Key Concepts Summarized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3 An Overview of the Development Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
8.1 Summary of the Answers in % to the Likert Scale Questions . . . 88
8.2 Questions of the Questionnaire Related to the Risk Assessment
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
8.3 The Risks Addressed by the Publications and Their Numbers . . 92
10.1 An Overview of the Stages of the Podcast Initiative . . . . . . . 126
10.2 The Key Concepts Summarized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
14.1 Summary of Research Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196
14.2 Classification of Mobile Learning Research Papers . . . . . . . . 202
xv

Chapter 1
Introduction
In 1977, Alan Kay and colleagues at Xerox PARC envisioned a mobile electronic device called “Dynabook” (Kay and Goldberg, 1977). The idea was
to develop a small portable computer in the shape of a book aimed to give
children access to interactive software applications and digital media. It is
only recently that information technologies have finally reached a level of
maturity that allows for this vision to be crystallized. Many of our everyday
intellectual activities are now supported by mobile devices. Learning, as a
particular instance of those activities can be now enhanced by multimediaequipped mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), pen tablet computers, and so on. The advance of information technologies and their adoption and integration into a wide variety of educational settings have allowed
for the field of mobile learning to grow to a set of significant activities in
schools, work-places, museums, cities, and rural areas around the world, as
acknowledged by Sharples et al. (2009). The focus on mobile learning has
increased in recent years, and it has lead to many research endeavors aiming at designing, developing and deploying mobile technologies to support
learning, according to Taylor et al. (2006).
According to Kukulska-Hulme and Traxler (2005), the prevalent understanding of mobile learning is that it is learning on the move, often enabling
the learner to take control over time and place, making it more spontaneous
and personal. Naismith et al. (2004) suggest that using the time when a
person is mobile is a way to tap in to a resource that may not have been used
optimally, or not used at all before. Sharples (2000) states that a learner
does not have to be on the move per se to experience mobile learning; just
requiring information without the ability to access static learning resources
(e.g., libraries, desktop computers, textbooks, etc.) suffice. This view is
also transparent in the definition of mobile learning provided by O’Malley
et al. (2003) stated as follows: “any sort of learning that happens when the
learner is not at a fixed, predetermined location, or learning that happens
when the learner takes advantage of learning opportunities offered by mobile
technologies”(p. 6).
Mobile learning as an emerging research field can be characterized by constant technological changes, novel pedagogical/educational approaches, and
collaborative endeavors. These initiatives (as they will be called from now
on in this thesis) are faced with, and need to deal with a set of problems to
1
1 Introduction
meet the challenges presented when establishing a new field of research. The
majority of these initiatives up to date have been initiated by researchers
(i.e., the core team) and the focus of these efforts has been mostly on exploring novel uses of mobile technologies and their potential to support
learning. However, these research efforts involved also other stakeholders
beyond members of the research community namely; students, teachers,
system architects, system developers, administrative staff, and hardware
vendors just to mention a number of those. In the context of this thesis
these stakeholders are called practitioners and they are also regarded as
part of the extended team.
J¨arvel¨a et al. (2007) remark that only a few studies give detailed arguments as to what these new opportunities are, in terms of learning interactions and collaboration and what are the exact processes that mobile tools
can scaffold. Hence, to this day, few of the mobile learning initiatives have
resulted in the implementation of actual learning aids that are in wide use,
as observed by Traxler (2007). Traxler (2007) also claims that the very nature of mobile learning “is essentially personal, contextual, and situated”(p.
1) meaning that it is particularly “noisy” and problematic when it comes
to its definition and assessment. The latest raises a concern related to the
large scale and sustainable implementation and adoption of mobile learning.
While a big number of research initiatives have been so far more technologydriven, there is a need to understand the impact of the technology and its
implementation in relation to the overall context and to comprehend and
share the reasons for (partial) success or failure stories.
Most of the publications at large report very little on what “went wrong”.
However, there are a number of cases in which researchers have identified
which problems may affect the expected results. Yeh et al. (2006) provide
one example of an initiative where the technology simply was not suited
for the actual use. They reported that their ButterflyNet, a mobile capture
and access system for field biology research students, based on the use of
smartphones and cameras, had trouble recognizing the visual tags given to
specific specimens due to tall grass. Nature, which was an obvious setting
for the trial, was a limiting factor, as the grass occluded parts of the barcode
that was supposed to be used to identify and coordinate the digital photos
and notes taken at the time.
Another example in this direction is provided from Boticki et al. (2009),
who designed a system called MILE (Mobile and Interactive Learning Environment) to support university teachers with instant feedback during lectures, and students to entice interaction and collaboration, through the use
of different modules available to mobile devices (e.g., schedule, whiteboard,
notebook, survey, and guide). Spite of the flexible solutions offered to the
learners, MILE required a lot from the students’ ability to multitask since,
for example, listening to a lecture, following a displayed presentation, answering surveys, taking notes, and exchanging them with others, all at the
same time is challenging even for the most skillful person.
The third example is based on the outcomes from the MyArtSpace project.
2
The goal of this initiative was directed to support students on their field
trips to museums with a platform enabling them to use a mobile phone and
record their visit through digital notes, photos, and sound and have access
to them later on their return to the classroom. The museums were responsible for handling and administrating the mobile devices and it turned out
that the curators at the museums did not want to maintain, charge, or
instruct the visiting students on their use. Besides, the question of who
will pay for the communication (over the network) had not been considered as mentioned by Sharples et al. (2007), which can also compromise the
outcome.
In order to tackle some of these difficulties, Sharples et al. (2009) suggest
that the design of mobile learning should be driven by specific learning
objectives and that the use of (mobile) technology should not the target but
rather a means to enable and facilitate learning activities. In fact, Taylor
(2004) claims that the field of mobile learning must develop a thorough
understanding of:
• the learning opportunities presented by the new mobile technology,
• its (potential) impact on the way people perform learning tasks,
• its (potential) impact on human social processes and interactions, and
• how these in turn are changed or modified by the technology.
The rapid development of mobile technologies combined with access to
contents almost anywhere and at any time allows people to experience new
situations regarding learning in a wide variety of situations. Mobile learning brings the promise of learning “on the move” by allowing learners to
take control over time and space, thus making learning “more natural”.
The field of mobile learning has rapidly evolved in the last ten years and
many initiatives have been conducted worldwide. However, research results
indicate that few of these efforts have produced any lasting outcomes.
As pointed out earlier in this section, the development and results in several mobile learning initiatives have been affected by technical limitations,
when environmental impacts such as weather or vegetation made them difficult or impossible to use or by an overestimation of learners’ abilities to
handle the technology and hence the tasks required of them, or by ending up with technical solutions that do not fit the intended organization’s
infrastructure.
These issues indeed have an influence and affect the development, implementation and adoption of a mobile learning initiative by making it more
complex, more costly, taking longer time, or not achieving the expected outcomes making this effort unsuitable for the learning purpose or setting, it
was conceived for. Traxler and Kukulska-Hulme (2005) refer to these problems as sustainability issues. They further state that often the initiatives
produce outcomes of a questionable value, and ones that may not scale up
outside the time and budget frame of a set project. Quite notably, it is evident that initiatives in mobile learning are faced with inherently complex
3
1 Introduction
settings and that the outcomes might not live up to their promises, will
not be adopted and, hence, will not become sustainable. (A more detailed
discussion on scalability and sustainability is provided in Chapter 5.)
Since the field of mobile learning is multidisciplinary, the development of
mobile learning may involve researchers that span across disciplines such as
Computer Science, Information Systems, Pedagogy, Project Management,
and so on. Actually, many of the complex issues faced by mobile learning
initiatives are similar to those faced by the development of information
systems. This suggests that an improved development practice might hold
one piece of the puzzle to more sustainable results in mobile learning.
For example, from an information systems development perspective it
can be useful to regard an information system consisting of components
that result from the interplay between technical artifacts (i.e., IT artifact)
and people. One example, from Bostrom and Heinen (1977), building on
the socio-technical school of thinking (from the Travistock Institute) acknowledges these as two separate systems, the social and the technical,
respectively, and focuses explicitly on the interactions between them. (For
more on these issues see Chapter 2 and Chapter 5.)
While mobile learning can be analyzed and understood from a sociotechnical systems perspective, it is still unclear if this notion is enough to
capture all the components and interactions. For example, the claims made
by Taylor (2004) stress the importance of knowing about how a learning task
is performed and the impact on the different social processes. The learning
tasks are, naturally, not explicitly part of the definition of socio-technical
systems. They can be fitted into the socio-technical systems terminology),
for example by considering pedagogical theories as an extension to either
the social or the technical system, but it is not clear if this is viable and a
good strategy. This specific concern is one of the driving forces that helped
to identify the research questions that guided the research presented in this
thesis.
1.1 Problem definition and motivation
As previously mentioned, lasting and sustainable outcomes in the field of
mobile learning are hard to come by. The results so far have been at best
inconclusive. Part of the difficulties is that these initiatives face being in
inherently complex settings including the diversity of team members who
are supposed to communicate and cooperate together. Overall, the promise
and the drive behind these initiatives have the best intentions. They are on
the quest to utilize (mobile) technology to enhance and improve learning
experiences.
Actually, many of the initiatives seem to fall short of what was expected of
them. These initiatives often propagate technology not suited for the actual
use in the settings, not being able to acknowledge and reserve support from
key personal at target organizations, little to no ambition reaching large4
1.2 Research Questions
scale audience in terms of users, or orchestrate learning scenarios that simple
do not make sense — not being able tie the location, the learning experience,
and the task together.
With respect to these difficulties, there is definitely a need to go back
to the drawing board. The blue prints, from the author’s point of view,
constitute the core in the development practices that should guide these
initiatives and how it can help to improve the outcomes of these efforts. An
improved understanding of development practices and how this is perceived
among the team members can be one means to improve the outcome of
these initiatives.
Consequently, the aim of the research presented in this thesis is to investigate the relation between information systems development practice and
mobile learning development and whether research and practices originated
within information systems development research can be used to strengthen
mobile learning initiatives. In order to investigate this relation this thesis
studies several mobile learning initiatives with a particular focus on how
and why development and research were initiated and conducted.
Thus, concepts found in mobile learning practices are strengthened by
providing a theoretical perspective with roots in information systems development. The outcomes of the studies presented in this thesis indicate that
the development practices of mobile learning initiatives can be redefined in
order to achieve more lasting results.
1.2 Research Questions
Based on the complexity inherent in mobile learning and its settings, the
hypothesis of this thesis is that the development practices of mobile learning
initiatives can be improved and be a means to enhance the outcomes of
coming mobile learning initiatives in terms of long-lasting usable results.
In order to enhance the understanding and aid the development process,
the following research questions have been identified:
1. What are the current research approaches and practices in the field of
mobile learning?
2. How are practices in information systems development and mobile
learning related?
3. How can knowledge (research and practice) from information systems
development support mobile learning?
4. How can the results of this research be brought back to the researchers
and practitioners in the mobile learning community?
The first research question aims to investigate the state of the art of mobile learning with a focus on research and development; understanding how
and why research is conducted, and what role the development practices
play. This question further aims to strengthen the hypothesis that a better
5
1 Introduction
understanding of the field will improve the sustainability of these initiatives and will have also positive implications when it comes to development
practices.
The second research question focuses on understanding how specific aspects of mobile learning are related to the field of information systems development. As discussed previously, information systems can be considered
as socio-technical systems. While mobile learning certainly can be described
as consisting of both a technical and a social system, the question is whether
this is a sufficient and suitable description.
There are social and technical systems present in mobile learning, and the
third research question revolves around how useful research and practices
in the field of information systems development are and how easily they can
be adapted to understand and improve mobile learning development and
practices.
The fourth and final research question looks at how the results of the research conducted in this thesis are best brought back to the mobile learning
community (currently populated by researchers). There are several means
to transfer research results, all of which have their benefits and drawbacks.
However, the goal of this work is to present the results in a way that is also
meaningful to mobile learning researchers and practitioners.
1.3 Limitations
This thesis is concerned only with the development practices of mobile learning drawing on knowledge on development practices arising from the field of
information systems. The development of mobile learning requires indeed
knowledge on pedagogy (e.g., learning and cognition theories), mobile technologies and software, and social communication, however, these areas not
explicitly addressed in this research. Hence, the discussion of how mobile
learning can improve learning or for example which pedagogic theories are
best suited for certain initiatives is left to other researchers to decide. The
development practices discussed in this thesis only points to the need for
such considerations.
1.4 Organization of the Thesis
The rest of this thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 introduces the theoretical foundations of this work. This is followed by a discussion on methodological considerations presented in Chapter 3. This chapter presents the
overall methodological view of the thesis, as well as the methods used
throughout the research. 4 presents an overview of the appended publications summarizing the research contributions of each one. Chapter 5 relates
the appended publications to the research questions posed in Chapter 1.
Each question is discussed with a focus on how the appended publications
6
1.4 Organization of the Thesis
together provide a deeper insight into the question and its answer. Chapter 6 concludes this thesis by providing a summary of the main contributions
as well as future directions of research. The last eight chapters contain the
appended publications.
7

Chapter 2
Theoretical Foundation
This chapter presents the theoretical foundations of this thesis. The aim
of the research is to investigate and improve the development practice of
initiatives in the field of mobile learning. The point of departure, given the
author’s background and main area of expertise, is placed within information systems development.
The chapter begins by discussing how computer-based systems are developed. The main purpose of this discussion is to establish the terminology
used within this thesis and why it was chosen. The chapter continues with
an overview into information systems development and the notion of sociotechnical system and the different perspectives it entail. This presentation
is not intended to provide a complete picture of information systems development nor its history.
As previously mentioned, mobile learning is the field of inquiry, and the
chapter also contains a discussion on the ongoing effort to establish theories
within this emerging research field. This discussion is intended to show how
the field moves from a technological focus to addressing more the learning
activities and the social context as important considerations.
In order to improve the development practice, there is a need to understand the problem domain and reason about it. A useful aid in understanding is to create conceptual models and in turn frameworks that capture
phenomena in reality. Describing reality and making theoretical contributions is always done with a certain degree of abstraction. Hence, this
chapter also includes a discussion on conceptual modeling, which was used
as an approach in formulating the framework that is the main contribution
of this thesis.
The chapter ends with a brief discussion of the similarities of the point of
departure and the field of inquiry. This discussion is the motivation behind
the second research question and it is continued in Chapter 5.
2.1 Development of Computer-Based Systems
Computers are ubiquitous in todays organizations. Hirschheim et al. (1995)
point out that computer-based systems have moved from supporting back
office (such as payroll) to enter into all functions in respect to the entire
organization. In the beginning the core work revolved on the development
9
2 Theoretical Foundation
of computer-based systems. These were programmed rather than designed,
and the development was technology focused and carried out by experts.
These experts often followed systematic practices, to help deal with the
complexity, but such practices were invented when needed and closely related to the technology at hand.
Programming practices and techniques that worked well were re-used,
and adapted as needed, basically forming sets of guidelines. But, with each
team or even person using their own practice, it was difficult to deal with
the development in a systematic way and communicating it to others. In
order to improve the situation, a great deal of research efforts was put
into reasoning about and describing the development process to provide a
theoretical platform to form the basis of work and communication.
This led to many important discoveries, such as the distinction between
logical and physical design, organizational development, risk analysis, stakeholder inclusion, etc. It also resulted in the formulation of life-cycle models
that describe the systems development, for example, the Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC) (Sommerville, 2006). Such life-cycle models
describe the development of an information system as a a set of stages,
to plan, manage, control, and evaluate the same (Avison and Fitzgerald,
2006). The stages of the SDLC can be described as:
• feasibility study,
• system investigation,
• systems analysis,
• systems design,
• implementation, and
• review and maintenance.
New methodologies were formulated as an attempt to describe information systems development practices. A information systems development
methodology, according to Hirschheim et al. (1995), can be described as a
collection of methods and tools that help the system developers in their
efforts. A method is a way to perform a particular activity during the development. A method often involves the use of one or more tools. Avison
and Fitzgerald (2006) remark that an information systems methodology also
has a conceptualization of a life-cycle.
However, an information systems development methodology is more than
a collection of methods. It is based on a philosophical view, and includes
beliefs and values. These guide both the overall development practices and
what is considered a good solution. A philosophy might be that an information system that is, for example, the easiest to implement, cheapest to
run, or liked by the stakeholders is preferable and regarded a good solution
(Avison and Fitzgerald, 2006).
There exist a large number of different information systems development
methodologies, and they differ in the collection of methods and tools or in
10
2.2 Information Systems Development
terms of the philosophical views. Two different methodologies might share
methods and tools but differ in their philosophical view. This makes certain
methodologies more suitable for some problems, people, or organizations
than others.
One example of an information systems development methodology is the
Rational Unified Process (RUP) (Kruchten, 2000). RUP uses the Unified
Modeling Language (UML), which is a tool, to describe use-cases, which is
a method. One belief of RUP is that the development practices should be
iterative and incremental.
Hence, a methodology provides a step by step description of how a system
should be developed, using the stages of the life-cycle, and the methods,
and tools included. Although, a large number of stages, methods, and tools
might make a methodology a blunt instrument to use in some cases, or
difficult to master according to Avison et al. (1998). Avison and Fitzgerald
(2006) state that a framework is similar to a methodology but less restricted
and rather than enforcing a strict step-by-step order it leaves room to choose
what best suit the situations, people, or organizations. A framework can
provide the overarching structure of the development practices and be a
platform for work and communication.
The use of the three concepts, methodology, method, and framework,
is not uncontroversial. Methodology can in many cases refer to both a
collection of methods and the study of methods. Cronholm and ˚Agerfalk
(1999) present a study of the use of the concepts of methodology and method
within information systems research and presents a conceptual model to help
define the concepts. In this thesis, however, having mobile learning as the
field of inquiry is compelled to use the concepts in the way that is familiar
to this community.
2.2 Information Systems Development
The introduction of information systems development methodologies, as
discussed in Section 2.1 advanced the development practice within the field
of information systems development greatly. However, there were still issues
with the end products (i.e., the information systems) produced. Many of the
information systems were technically sophisticated, but lacking in terms of
connecting to the social work environment. The development methodologies
often regarded information systems as solely computer-based systems and
their introduction as a technological activity.
Smithson and Hirschheim (1998) state that the introduction of an information system normally has social, organizational, and human implications and is never just a technological activity. The information system
represents more than just computers and software. The users and the organizations they are part of both affect and are affected by the information
system, putting focus on issues such as usability, policy, ethics, and so forth.
Smithson and Hirschheim (1998) further suggest that there are few com11
2 Theoretical Foundation
mon or widespread organizational interventions so poorly understood and
surrounded by such exaggerated expectations as information technology.
Hence the approach to regard information system in terms of a sociotechnical system emerged, acknowledging it as a system that involves complex interactions between people, machines, and the work environment, according to Emery and Trist (1960). Another example, also building on the
socio-technical school of thinking acknowledges these as two separate systems, the social and the technical, respectively, and focuses explicitly on
the interactions between them (Bostrom and Heinen, 1977). Badham et al.
(2001) state that there are five key features of a socio-technical system are
that:
• the system has interdependent parts,
• the system adapts to and pursues goals in external environments,
• the system has an internal environment comprising separate but interdependent technical and social sub-systems,
• the goals of the system can be achieved by multiple means, and
• the system performance relies on the joint optimization of the technical
and social sub-systems.
Socio-Technical Systems Design (STSD) approaches take the people, machines, and context into consideration when developing systems. There are
several such approaches that often exist on a more abstract level than the
methodologies discussed in Section 2.1. One such example is the ten principles provided by Cherns (1987). The principles are formulated on a level
relating to social and organizational aspects. While these principles point
out important issues, they provide little (practical) guidance for someone
developing an information system. These are more to be seen as a checklist. For example, one principle is labeled “Incompleteness”, since redesign
is continuous and is the function of self-regulating teams, emphasizing that
work group design is never complete.
There are, however, some approaches to STSD that can be considered as
systems development methodologies. One such example is ETHICS (Mumford, 1983) where the social and technical systems are designed in parallel
to allow them to intertwine and to help optimize their interaction. Another
key aspect of ETHICS is active end-user participation in the design. Another example is the Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) (Checkland, 1999a),
which was developed as a move from thinking about systems in “hard” engineering terms. SSM does not divide a system into technical and social
(sub-)systems but rather view the system as being composed of logically
linked activities. A key feature of SSM is the focus to develop an understanding of a problematic situation. In this sense, SSM is essentially an
analytical approach.
While there is a general consensus that an information system should
be considered within its social context, and that the problem addressed
12
2.2 Information Systems Development
by STSD is important, the approaches have failed to make a significant
impact on how systems are developed (e.g., Mumford (2006)). A problem
that makes the adoption of STSD more difficult is the term socio-technical
system. The term was coined by researchers at the Travistock Institute
with a specific meaning. It is also often closely linked to the ETHICS
methodology. However, the term has been adopted by many researchers
in different fields, often using their own interpretation. A socio-technical
system often refer to the social and the technical system (as the name
imply), while the interaction between these are disregarded.
Another source of problems with STSD seems to be that compared to the
technical, the social appears more complex and difficult to make sense of,
hence less explored and understood. For example, several technical characteristics, such as response time or failure rate, can be defined and measured
for an IT artifact, while ergonomics and usability are perceived more challenging to measure. Majchrzak and Borys (2001) claim that the existing
socio-technical systems theories are not specific enough to allow for empirical testing. Further, it can be difficult to define criteria to measure the social
elements of the system. Land (2000) discusses how to, for example, measure
job satisfaction, but also point the fact that the success is measured by various stakeholders and they have different viewpoints and value systems. In
a sense, the technical element measures can be considered objective, while
the social are more subjective often leading to difficulties comparing and
making choices.
There is also a concern to find the right abstraction level. The information
systems development methodologies established life-cycle models as well as
methods to model and reason about the information system. From this
view point, it might be tempting to divide a socio-technical system into
a social and a technical part, and then continue to decompose these two
separately. This in turn might result in a different emphasis on the two
parts, and focus often falls on the technical. Another concern regarding
the abstraction level was raised by Hollnagel (1998) who points to an overemphasis of the context of a socio-technical system (i.e., the organization)
at the expense of the individual.
In a sense, the complexity of the social dimensions in this respect and the
difficulty to find reasonable abstraction levels to handle these, attributed
to the identity crisis noticeable in information systems research according
to Benbasat and Zmud (2003) and Orlikowski and Iacono (2001). For example, Orlikowski and Iacono (2001) argue, based on a review of articles
published in information systems research between 1990 and 1999, that a
significant number of these either focus on the context, some capability of
the computer-based system, or a specific variable assigned to the implementation or use of the technology. In many cases the computer-based system is
implicit in the research, i.e., assumed to work in the background. Orlikowski
and Iacono (2001) conclude that “we will need to stop taking IT artifacts for
granted and begin to take them seriously enough to theorize about them”(p.
131), and propose five premises as a basis for further theorizing. In short,
13
2 Theoretical Foundation
they argue that:
• IT artifacts are always value based, since they are designed and used
by people with different interests, values, and assumptions.
• IT artifacts are always embedded in a historical and cultural context.
• IT artifacts are usually made up of several components, and generic
terms such as the Internet and “the Technology” should generally be
avoided.
• IT artifacts are not fixed and independent, but co-evolve with the
workpractice in which they are embedded.
• IT artifacts are subject to changes in technology.
Benbasat and Zmud (2003) also point to the need to theorize the IT
artifact, and propose what should be included and excluded for the field of
information systems research. They state that it is necessary to understand
the role of the IT artifact in a social context, and which aspects of both
the IT artifact and the social context that should be left for other fields to
investigate. Benbasat and Zmud (2003) assume that the IT artifact exists
within a social context and they focus on three core information system
properties: the IT artifact, its use, and its impact. This is in line with
the socio-technical system view that the technology has social effects. This
correlate with Lee and Baskerville (2003), who state that an information
system is emerging, in a broad sense, from the interaction between people,
practices, and technology.
2.3 Mobile Learning Development
In order to understand mobile learning and the issues initiatives faces there
is a need to understand how the field evolved. The idea to use information
technology to support learning is not new. The term e-learning is often
used to describe the use of computers in education, but the term itself is
ambiguous and can refer to many different aspects of technology-supported
learning. A common meaning of the term is web-based distance education.
Almost all definitions of the word have a strong focus on technology, and
much of the research into the field of e-learning has focused on the development and use of information technology.
An early definition of mobile learning referred to it as e-learning using
mobile devices stating “it’s e-learning through mobile computational devices:
Palms, Windows CE machines, even your digital cell phone”(p. 1) to cite
Quinn (2000). This definition carries over the e-learning focus on technology
to mobile learning, and considers it as a means to access content, rather than
as a way to integrate learning as a part of an increasingly mobile style of
life.
The concept of mobility in mobile learning is larger than the mobility
of devices. Sharples et al. (2009) define the mobility in mobile learning as
including:
14
2.3 Mobile Learning Development
• the physical space,
• technology,
• the conceptual space,
• the social space, and
• time.
Learning can (and does) happen at any time and at any place. Sometimes
the location or time is important to learning (such as a museum visit) and
sometimes it is just a setting (such as the gym). Research in the field of
mobile learning can be considered the investigation of how these aspects of
mobility assisted by technology can help learners to receive and gain new
knowledge. The view of mobility in mobile learning is in many ways similar
to studies of the role of mobility in information systems, for example, as
investigated by Kakihara and Sørensen (2002).
The new focus of mobile learning has resulted in a call for a theory of
mobile learning, that incorporate how mobile learning differs from other
kinds of learning. Sharples et al. (2005) define five criteria and suggest that
any theory of mobile learning should be tested against these questions;
• is it significantly different from current theories of classroom, workplace
or lifelong learning?
• does it account for the mobility of learners?
• does it cover both formal and informal learning?
• does it theorize learning as a constructive and social process?
• does it analyze learning as a personal and situated activity mediated
by technology?
A great deal of effort has been put into providing such a theoretical basis
for mobile learning. The rest of this section highlights a number of the
theories produced.
Laouris and Eteokleous (2005) rest on a mathematical notation when
they provide what they consider an educationally relevant definition of mobile learning. The mathematical notation is used to describe relations and
dependencies between elements, e.g., content, IT, learning environment. In
terms of intent they try to describe all the relevant parts of mobile learning
in an abstract but structured and systematically complete way.
They propose the following formulation for the definition:
MLearn = f{t, s, LE, c,IT, MM , m}
Where, t = time, s = space, LE = learning environment, c = content,
IT = information technology, MM = mental, and m = method. These
definitions are covering technical, methodological, pedagogical, social, and
philosophical dimensions. The concepts are then described as relations and
dependencies, using functions. For example, the Information Technology
15
2 Theoretical Foundation
resources available are described as functionally dependent on the learning
space, IT = f{s}. The attempt is done to address the complexity of mobile
learning and is a way to visualize in greater detail the interrelation between
certain elements.
Sharples (2005) proposes that mobile learning is defined as the processes
of coming to know through conversations across multiple contexts amongst
people and personal interactive technologies. A central claim of this definition is the importance of conversation. Sharples rest upon work by Dewey
and Friere, and claim that conversation is the driving process of learning.
To better understand and define the conversations and the role they play
in the process of learning, Sharples turn to Conversation Theory (Pask,
1976). Conversation theory has been used for similar purposes, for example
by Sharples (2003) and Laurillard (2002). Technology provides the means
for or enriches conversations. Every human involved in a conversation has
a physical location, a context. This context has to be negotiated by the
parties of a conversations, since mobile learning allows for the learners to
experience different contexts. The learning is characterized as a process of
coming to know through conversation across continually reconstructed contexts.
In order to better understand the learning activities and the context,
Sharples et al. (2005) suggest to analyze mobile learning as a culturalhistorical activity system (Engestr¨om, 1987) mediated by tools. They further suggest that the expanded activity model (Engestr¨om, 1987) should
be viewed from two perspectives (i.e., have two layers), a technical and a
semiotic, in order to better explain the role of technology in learning. Similarly, they suggest that the cultural Rules, Community, and Division of
Labor should be renamed Control, Context, and Communication to better
support the communication between educational theorists and technology
developers.
The theory developed by Sharples et al. (2005) is used (as an input) to
formulate a systems development methodology for mobile learning by Taylor et al. (2006). It is based on the socio-cognitive engineering methodology (Sharples et al., 2002), which focus on the analysis of interactions
between people and computer-based technology. Socio-cognitive engineering is user-centered but also acknowledge that users are not always reliable
informants (Sharples et al., 2002). In order to deal with this, the methodology suggests to both carry out field studies to study the users and how
they interact with technology as well as to take an analytical stance and
for example study the cognitive processes and social interactions to form a
theory of use. These two together form a task model that is used as input
to the iterative development practices of socio-cognitive engineering and
Taylor et al. (2006) provide such a task model for mobile learning.
Taylor (2004) presents a conceptual model where the overall aim is to evaluate the pedagogical effectiveness of mobile learning and thus ensure that it
is sound. She is starting from a technical standpoint, entering into usability
aspects, and continuing with pedagogic issues and socio-pedagogical per16
2.4 Conceptual Modeling
spectives while also acknowledging that these areas influencing each other.
The intent is to guide evaluation to understand the reasons for success or
failure respectively.
In another effort to deal with the development of mobile learning, Vavoula
and Sharples (2009) propose a conceptual model built on holistic and systematic evaluation divided in three levels of granularity, i.e., micro, meso,
and macro, to guide the data collection when designing, implementing, and
deploying mobile learning. The requirements analysis persists throughout
an initiative’s life-cycle, and covers all three levels of analysis. They conclude that mixed methods are increasingly present in the design of evaluation activities for mobile learning. The core approach is to continuously
address the granularity and employ strategic evaluation to guide the development process.
2.4 Conceptual Modeling
The systems approach is a central conception in information systems research and practices (e.g., Checkland and Holwell (1998)). The systems
approach would treat the IT artifact, its users, and any relevant parts
of the organization as one whole integrated purposeful system. The system approach to develop information systems takes its roots from early
management theory, and is based on Bertalanffy’s General System Theory
(mentioned in Avison and Wood-Harper (1991)), who formalized the system concept. Systems are defined as sets of interrelated parts that have
emergent properties, which cannot be identified in any of the parts when
viewed individually.
From the perspective of a systems approach, it must be understood that it
is a way of thinking, as pointed out by Checkland (1999a). In applying this
thinking, the researcher tries to view the system holistically in a particular
environment, always keeping in mind what the system as a whole is suppose
to achieve. So, in utilizing the system approach the researcher would treat
the information technology, its users, and the relevant organization as one
whole purposeful and integrated system but also acknowledging it as an open
system existing in an environment(Hasan, 1999). As one of the founding
advocators of the systems approach, Churchman (1971) considers the goal
of a researcher to bridge philosophical reflection into the world of practice.
Conceptual models and frameworks are created in an attempt to capture
a certain degree of abstraction. It contains a unification or synthesis and
also triggers the ability to understand the magnitude of issues involved.
The conceptual model is there to correspond to the actual research. This
is to understand better the different findings throughout the research and
put them into context. In accordance with Robinson (2006), a framework
is the abstraction of a real or proposed system. Thus, in order to develop a
conceptual model, some level of simplification of reality is needed. A conceptual model can be seen as a set of concepts that stand in relation to each
17
2 Theoretical Foundation
other to explain a phenomenon in the real world. This entails a presentation of the conceptual model, often consisting of an explanation interlinking
text, figures, and tables, which all are descriptive and informative in character, to match the intended audience. Conceptual models can be useful as
a thinking tool, as it is bringing together practice, theory, and research in
a attempt to give greater understanding of the complexity involved.
In the academic field, researchers have employed concepts from other
areas to make progress in “understanding” a phenomenon in the real world.
However, their conceptual models are often not shaped to be understood
by practitioners, but have the target group of other researchers instead.
There seem to be a wide gap between some conceptual models and practice.
This is something frameworks normally are trying to bridge by merging the
academic theoretical thinking while also providing a tangible conceptual
model for practitioners to work from.
2.5 Summary
This chapter discusses how both information systems development and mobile learning moved from a technical focus to include social dimensions in
an attempt to provide theoretical contributions that better captures how
the IT artifact is perceived and used. Information systems development
acknowledged the socio-technical nature of an information system early on.
This notion was later adopted by other related research fields, such as mobile learning, and applied to understand how (computer-based) systems are
seen in relation to users.
Even if both mobile learning and information systems development research still struggle to describe the interaction between people, practices,
and technology, there is a major difference. Information systems development established information systems development methodologies that
represent a sound approach to development practices. This sound approach
has lead to information systems that are sustainable, meaning present and
persistent in every day life of people and constituting the backbone of organizations. While a number of theoretical contributions to handle the sociotechnical nature of mobile learning exist, mobile learning has yet to produce
initiatives (originating from the research community) with any lasting outcomes. There is a lack of conceptual modeling and in turn frameworks
adjusted to the interplay between researchers and practitioners (concerning
the development practice).
To further investigate the research and development practice in mobile
learning the next chapter addresses the methodological considerations and
the methods utilized in this thesis.
18
Chapter 3
Methodological Considerations
This chapter presents the methodological view of the thesis, providing an
introduction to interpretative research, research methods utilized, the overall research process, and the distinguishable data sources. The data sources
are briefly introduced in relation to the method or methods used and which
publications they correspond to. In the publications appended there are
more elaborated details on the data sources and methods.
3.1 Interpretative Research
The concepts of methodology and method can be confusing and easily misinterpreted, as discussed by Checkland (1999b). In brief, he states that the
methodology is a set of principles for the method. The seven principles for
interpretative field research proposed by Klein and Myers (1999) serve as
an example of a methodology.
The first and overarching principle of the hermeneutics circle suggests
that all human understanding is achieved by alternating between the interdependent meaning of parts and the whole that they form. This is the
fundamental principle that the other six expand from. Second in line is
the principle of contextualization, which ensures that the relevant context
is decided and boundaries are drawn up. Third, the principle of interaction
involves that the researcher “creates” data in the field and that the material is by definition socially constructed through constant interaction. The
principle of abstraction and generalization is given as number four, which
requires the application of principles one and two to enable providing general theoretical concepts that describe the nature of human understanding
and social action. Five, six, and seven are also interconnected, and the
principle of dialogical reasoning (no. 5) emphasizing the researcher’s own
intellectual history as an influential part on the research and how the principle of multiple interpretations (no. 6) needs to be acknowledged using the
principle of suspicion (no. 7) to ensure that the data is handled sensitively
and under a scrutinizing eye.
So in brief, a methodology provides general thoughts on how to solve a
problem. Further, it states common ideas, concepts, and how to understand
them. Still, the ideas and concepts from the methodology also reflect how
the problem is perceived by the researcher, who needs a deep insight into
19
3 Methodological Considerations
the problem situation. This determines the application of a particular research method (or methods). In line with this, all methods have weaknesses
and strengths as this variation in applying research methods and the underlying tool set (i.e., that the same data gathering techniques can be used in
different methods) depends on the research problem and on the researcher
(i.e., Weltanschauung, training, and skills), as acknowledged by Hirschheim
(1985). Yet again, understanding the problem situation is important when
deciding the way the research should be carried out. The research question and the data that are to be extracted should be the guide. J¨arvinen
(2004) explicitly mentions that the researcher always has a personal motivation to perform a scientific study and that this greatly influences the
research and the type of outcome expected. Here, for example, the attitude
and stance of qualitative and quantitative are important, as all methods
inherently possess both qualities. However, this stance functions within
different assumptions about the nature of the world and requires a different attitude towards tools and procedures. Quantitative research usually
puts more emphasis on a positivistic paradigm and qualitative research on
a more interpretive paradigm, as mentioned by Baskerville (1999).
Researchers working within the positivistic paradigm see reality as separate from themselves, and expect everybody to have the same perception
of the shared phenomenon and thus common understanding. Researchers
working within the interpretive paradigm see reality as a social construct
and do not necessarily expect others to have the same perception or understanding of a shared phenomenon (Robson, 2002). The interpretative
paradigm supports the belief that reality is constructed by subjective perception and that predictions cannot be made. However, probabilities rather
than certainties can be expressed. Interpretive researchers act on the assumption that reality is being created and constantly re-created in respect
to social situations (Checkland and Holwell, 1998). Researchers who agree
with this paradigm are interested in the study of social and cultural phenomena. With reference to Argyris et al. (1985), the crucial elements in a
research approach, which works within a special social situation, are:
• a collaborative process between a researcher and the people in the situation,
• a process of critical inquiry,
• a focus on social practice, and
• a deliberate process of reflective learning.
Under the interpretative umbrella, understanding is thus about seeing a
phenomenon, which is happening in reality as something worth addressing.
This can, for example, involve seeing patterns in the empirical material that,
linked to a wider theoretical frame, can provide greater understanding of
the phenomena. From this perspective, interpreting is about seeing things
in new ways, or assigning new meanings to them. Thus, the interpretative researcher is engaged in a dialogue with both empirical and theoretical
20
3.1 Interpretative Research
material according to Alvesson and Sk¨oldberg (2000), interpreting them in
combination, and creating new theory from it. This type of research process
is very demanding in terms of choices and ethical considerations in regard to
applying theories and collecting empirical material. However, the result is
often novel, surprising, and thought-evoking, and contributes to a theoretical refinements in an academic setting together with relevant perspectives
for practitioners.
In interpretative research gathering empirical material and utilizing prior
knowledge of the phenomena are also interrelated, meaning that researcher
moves back and forth between pre-established foundations from methodological stance, theoretical considerations, empirical observations (data),
and the enhancement of the before-mentioned aspects. This iterative analysis is an adequate description of the actual interpretative research process
but when presenting this kind of research, Suddaby (2006) advises a more
linear approach in order to communicate and give an understanding of the
resulting contributions to other academics and practitioners. This advice
has been the guiding-star in presenting the research process.
Figure 3.1 is provided in order to give an account of the overall research
featuring the interpretative and iterative processes (depicted as a two sideby-side spirals) in combination with methods (depicted as four parallel
downward branches) and the manifestations in the shape of publications
(depicted by a square with the consecutive Roman number of the specific
publication) that have been produced. In total, a thesis emerges as a final
result (also shown as a square). In essence, the interpretative and iterative
processes form an infinite loop, which (in practice) comes to a (fictitious)
stop as the researcher reaches a point of sensible meaning, free of inner contradictions, which is then described, reviewed, and (hopefully) published.
In other words, Figure 3.1 is an illustration of how the overarching research process can be depicted, specifying the helix movement inherent of
the methodology in interpretative research. The connection points between
methods and publications are shown, and the end product, i.e., the thesis,
is integrated at the bottom of the figure. The thesis, or rather the cover
paper, is regarded as a ninth publication. The eight publications are appended to the thesis in their entirety, each one making its own contribution,
but together they also make an overarching contribution. This contribution,
the sum of the eight appended papers, is reflected in the cover paper. This
is illustrated by making the methods, i.e., the four branches, overlap with
the square representing the thesis. The normative branch overlaps the thesis square-more than the other methods, as the main contribution, i.e., the
framework, can be considered normative.
The interpretative and iterative research processes are what best describes
the research conducted in this thesis. These together provide the core principles for the research, leading up to the selection of appropriate research
methods, which should coincide with the research question (cf. Chapter 1),
the theoretical foundation (cf. Chapter 2), the empirical data to be gathered
(cf. Chapter 4), and the researcher’s abilities.
21
3 Methodological Considerations
N
O
R
M
A
T
I
V
E
R
E
S
E
A
R
C
H
A
C
T
I
O
N
R
E
S
E
A
R
C
H
S
U
R
V
E
Y
R
E
S
E
A
R
C
H
F
I
E
L
D
S
T
U
D
Y
S
U
F
I
R
M V
E
L
R
R
S
E
T
A
R V
E
!"
!""
!"""
#$%&"&
"
"""
""
!
"!
Figure 3.1: The Research Process.
3.2 Research Methods
There are four research methods relevant for this thesis. These are action
research, field study, survey research, and normative research. An introduction and the fundamentals of each of these methods are given, starting with
action research.
Some fundamental features of action research are stated by J¨arvinen
(2005), for example, that the researcher should contribute to the practical concerns of people in a situation, which means taking action and evaluating the action at the same time, both to be carried out between the
researcher and the population concerned. As the word action implies, the
researcher is engaged actively, which profits both the organization and the
researcher, in combining practice and theory. This is in line with the ideas
of Baskerville and Myers (2004), who argue that the goal of action research
is to solve a problem in a real setting and also to make a knowledge contribution. According to Darke et al. (1998), the researcher is to be an active
participant and the empirical observations and material gathering are performed acknowledging the prior theoretical standpoints. A researcher needs
to be able to balance this heavy involvement as well as the strengths and
weaknesses that follow. The argument to be particularly mentioned is the
involvement issue, which can be criticized as the researcher is coupled so
closely to the situation and may lose the critical stance (Checkland and
Holwell, 1998).
22
3.2 Research Methods
Action research is particularly suited for being applied in a real and natural setting and in studying social and cultural phenomenon (Myers, 1997).
According to Baskerville and Myers (2004), the researcher actively participates in solving a problem while at the same time evaluating the results and
making a knowledge contribution at large. For example, it allows for the
introduction, transformation, evaluation, and extraction of theories. The
advantage of being so engaged in the activity facilitates first-hand understanding and supports the learning process for all those involved. However, the disadvantage is that it can be very time consuming, and since the
researcher takes part in the phenomenon studied, remaining at a critical
stance can be hard. On the other hand, this unique position of in-house
work allows the researcher to produce highly relevant results while informing theory simultaneously (Baskerville, 1999, Baskerville and Myers, 2004).
Even though the outcome is attached uniquely to the research conducted,
it does offer a degree of external validity, since others can interpret the
theoretical contribution made. Nevertheless it can still be difficult to generalize from. In relation to mobile learning, action research provides an
opportunity for a researcher to jointly collaborate with the“team.” Further, action research, as a method, has been recognized in the information
systems research community and entered into journals as well as conference
proceedings, according to Avison and Myers (2002).
Wadsworth (1998) points to the difference between action research and
field study, and how they relate to the phenomenon studied. The emphasis of action research is participation, while field studies are more nonparticipatory. In a field study, the researcher sets up a number of variables,
collects data, and contributes conclusions and recommendation based on
the data. In action research, the researcher is actively engaged in the field,
reflecting on the results, and bringing about changes. An important part of
action research is to make a contribution to practice.
So, field studies are also characterized by taking place in a natural setting,
but allowing the researcher a flexible stance in respect to variables, as well
as the degree and manipulation of the same. However, as the control over
the variables increases, pragmatism decreases. Using a range of qualitative
and quantitative approaches, data is often collected through observations
and interviews, supporting the study of complex situated interactions and
processes as addressed by Klein and Myers (1999). The phenomena are
placed in a social and cultural context. The advantage is acquiring a corpus
of data, realistically extracted in a relatively short time. The disadvantages
are unknown biases, extensive data collection, and having no guarantee that
the data is representative.
Survey research on the other hand, provides information from a defined
population and the data, which is gathered directly through, e.g., interviews, questionnaires, and publications, is assumed to be independent of
the environment as stated by Fowler (2002). In essence, data from survey
research is collected without the researcher intervening or having a stake
in anything other than the gathering of data. Data is most often analyzed
23
3 Methodological Considerations
quantitatively, but data from, for example, interview surveys can also be analyzed qualitatively. According to Gable (1994), survey research has three
distinct characteristics. The first being designing and producing quantitative descriptions of some aspects of a study population. The second is
collecting the data in a structured and pre-defined way. Thirdly, the data
is generally collected from a fraction of the population, but this is done in
such a way that generalizations for the whole population can be made. The
advantages are that they facilitate large amounts of data to be gathered
with relatively little effort, supporting broad generalizations of results. A
high level of control regarding sample subjects also makes the reduction of
bias possible, and thus increases validity. However, a disadvantage is that it
suffers from providing only snapshots of the studied phenomena and relies
heavily on the subjective views of the respondents.
While normative research can be described as less rigorous in terms of
research method per se, it instead addresses interesting phenomena from a
pragmatic standpoint. This is done in order to stimulate and indicate directions for future research, and for example covers writings of application
descriptions, idea, concept, and suggestion development (Tolvanen et al.,
1996). The narratives often seem intuitively correct but are not exclusively
based on theory or fieldwork, as well as being presented according to the
style of a practitioner, i.e., giving an intimate and subjective view, focusing on what worked in a particular situation. Often the publications give
an insight into first-hand experience and form the basis for other forms of
research, but opinions might influence the research. The advantage is that
this kind of writing is more straightforward and often perceived as easier
to produce compared to presenting complex theoretical contributions. The
drawbacks consist of limited theoretical foundation, weak methodological reflection, and low generalizability. However, the ones that reach the stage of
publication often provide well-prepared arguments with considerable backing from other sources. Normative research is used to give descriptions of
practice, conceptual modeling, and informing and teaching concepts.
3.3 The Research Process Explained
The iterative cycle of planning, acting, observing, and reflecting supports
the analysis of an application and problem area and has been utilized for
the overall research. It is a cyclic process involving four linked phases, illustrated in Figure 3.2 (Kemmis and Wilkinson, 1998). The theoretical contribution emerged through iterations of action research cycles (Baskerville,
1999).
To further explain the overall research process, field studies, and survey
research have been planned, ongoing action and observations made, in turn
the gathering of the empirical data have been accompanied by constant reflecting, specifically in terms of also making theoretical connections. The
main aim was always to contribute to the practical concerns of people in
24
3.3 The Research Process Explained
PLAN
REFLECT ACT
OBSERVE
REFLECT ACT
OBSERVE
REVISED
PLAN
Cycle 1 Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Figure 3.2: The Iterative Cycles of Action Research.
a problem-riddled situation and to develop a theoretical contribution that
could possibly help to increase the competence and self-help ability of researchers and practitioners in the field of mobile learning. The theoretical
contribution (i.e., a framework) emerged through the process of identifying
findings and specifying these.
In order to analyze the application area, the iterative cycle of the action
research approach was utilized, reflecting on the research being part of the
iterative cycle. The experiences gained during this research created the
opportunity to contribute to the theoretical enhancement and to define
a framework that attempts to illustrate scalability. The aim is for the
framework to be useful to get sustainability in the information systems
development process and as a thinking aid for researchers and practitioners
working in the mobile learning community.
According to Holter and Schwartz-Barcott (1993), an action researcher
handles and bridges theory, research, and practice. One characteristic of
action research, specified by Hult and Lennung (1980), is that the approach
is applicable primarily to understanding change processes in social systems.
The author of this thesis was new to the fieldwork connected to mobile
learning, but entered the field with a theoretical, as well a research background. Fieldwork and, consequently, field studies have been the method to
really understand the problem situation and get a thorough understanding
of the situation at hand. Through survey research more empirical data has
been gathered to support the overall learning process and get a substantial
amount of material to support the other methods in a more quantitative
way.
The mixture of research methods – triangulation – is advocated by Mingers
(2003) on the grounds that both the target of the research and the research
process are complex and multidimensional, requiring a range of different
data collection approaches in order to produce richer and more reliable results extracted from more data sources. Triangulation is also discussed by
Yin (2003), who emphasizes that the use of multiple sources of evidence
impose a great burden on the researcher, who needs to master a variety of
25
3 Methodological Considerations
data gathering techniques and the extensive collection of data they produce.
Further, Yin (2003) presents four types of triangulation, hence
• of data sources i.e., data triangulation,
• among different researchers i.e., investigators triangulation,
• of perspectives to the same data sources i.e., theory triangulation, and
• of methods i.e., methods triangulation.
Lee and Baskerville (2003) present a noteworthy distinction between
empirical and theoretical statements. Empirical statements can refer to
data, measurements, observations, or descriptions about a real world phenomenon, while theoretical statements postulate the existence of entities
and relationships that cannot be directly observed, and hence only be theorized upon. Reflecting on the learning process and providing new contributing results fall under a normative method and so does this thesis, which is
a vehicle for reporting on the overall research endeavor.
One major consequence of the choice of action research as a method
is that the research outcome is context-bound as opposed to context-free
(Horsburgh, 2003). It is difficult to determine the cause of a particular
effect, which could be due to the environment (including its subjects), the
researcher, or the methodology. Even though the results of action research
are more qualitative in nature and attached uniquely to the research, they
do offer a degree of external validity, according to Avison et al. (2008),
since the theory developed can be interpreted and refined by others in other
real-world situations.
Furthermore, Avison et al. (1999) say that an action researcher can address complex real-life problems, and the resulting contributions are of immediate concern to practitioners, although the findings as well as their
presentation need to be in accordance with this audience and often of a
descriptive character, as recognized by Small (1995).
3.4 The Data Sources
The empirical data used to support the research is gathered from four distinguishable data sources. A data source can be put in relation to another
data source and form a unit of analysis. It is once the researcher has decided
on the level of analysis that a unit of analysis can be defined. To further explain, the unit of analysis, according to Robson (2002), is the entity that is
being described and analyzed during a specific research study. The material
has then been used to study a number of different aspects of the information
system development practices in mobile learning. Next, a short description
of the data sources, methods, and data gathering techniques are mentioned,
and which publication or publications it corresponds to (i.e., where further
and more details are provided).
The first data source is a mobile learning initiative at Canterbury University, Christchurch, New Zealand. The author of this thesis was an active
26
3.4 The Data Sources
participant in the initiative, and the data was gathered during this participation by the use of a number of methods, i.e., field study, action research,
and normative research. Different data gathering techniques have been applied such as interviews, questionnaires, observations, and literature review.
The research is addressed in Publications I, III, IV, V. Additionally, further
reading can be found in Wingkvist (2008).
The second data source constitutes of all the mobile learning initiatives
within Kaleidoscope. Kaleidoscope is a Special Interest Group and a European Research Network of Excellence in the field of Technology Enhanced
Learning. The research was basically an investigation and the methods
utilized were normative research, survey research, and field study. The
empirical data was gathered through interviews (with 3 project managers),
questionnaires (targeted all 30 project managers, although with 50% answerrate), and a literature review (28 publications). The research is presented
in Publication II.
The third data source is two initiatives from the CeLeKT (Center for
Knowledge and Learning Technologies) research group, V¨axj¨o University,
V¨axj¨o, Sweden. The author of this thesis participated in part in these two
initiatives, and was also able to rely on data gathered by other researchers
that participated and on informal interviews with these researchers. The
method employed is field study and the empirical data was gathered through
interviews, observations, questionnaires, and a literature review. This is
addressed in publications VI and VII.
The fourth data source consists of 76 research publications from two
proceedings of the World Conference of Mobile Learning (in short called
mLearn). mLearn is the leading conference in the field of mobile learning.
The method used is survey research, and the data was gathered through a
literature review. This research is addressed in Publication VIII.
In the next chapter the eight publications are introduced briefly with
title and the name of the international conferences they were presented at,
followed by summaries.
27

Chapter 4
Overview of Research Efforts
This section presents an overview and summaries of the appended publications (Bell et al., 2009, Wingkvist and Ericsson, 2009a;b;c;d;e;f;g).
In brief, publications I, VI, and VII, address the development practice of
mobile learning initiatives. Publication II evaluates how a socio-technical
risk assessment model can be applied on mobile learning initiatives. In publications III, IV, and V, central concepts are discussed and a development
framework is presented, along with the motivations behind it. Publication
VIII analyzes the research process in terms of methods and purposes for
a number of publications in order to find out the prevalent trends in the
forefront of mobile learning research.
The eight appended publications together form a complete picture of
the research conducted. In other words, this thesis consists of eight peerreviewed scientific publications that have been presented at different international conferences. Five of the papers explore the field of mobile learning
and its practice, while the other three publications present the central ideas
that serve as the basis for the proposed framework, how it has been developed and the motivations behind its creation.
The following is a list of the appended publications. The rest of the section
contains a summary of each of them with a focus on purpose, method, and
results.
Publication I Tim Bell, Andy Cockburn, Anna Wingkvist, and Richard Green (2009). “Podcasts as a supplement in tertiary education: An experiment with two Computer Science courses” — Book
chapter in Podcasting in Education, ICFAI Books. Published previously in Proceedings of the International Conference on Mobile
Learning Technologies and Applications (MoLTA’07), pp. 70–77.
Publication II Anna Wingkvist and Morgan Ericsson (2009). “Thinking ahead in mobile learning projects: a survey on risk assessment”
— Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Perspectives
in Business Informatics Research (BIR 2009), pp. 57–66.
Publication III Anna Wingkvist and Morgan Ericsson (2009). “Addressing sustainability for research initiatives in mobile learning
through scalability” — Proceedings of the 8th IASTED International Conference on Web-Based Education (WBE’09), pp. 7–12.
29
4 Overview of Research Efforts
Publication IV Anna Wingkvist and Morgan Ericsson (2009). “Bringing forth a framework to tackle the development process in mobile learning” — Proceedings of the 15th International Conference
at Centre for Philosophy, Technology, and Social Systems (CPTS
2009).
Publication V Anna Wingkvist and Morgan Ericsson (2009). “A
meta-model describing the development process of mobile learning” — Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on WebBased Learning (ICWL 2009), pp. 454–463.
Publication VI Anna Wingkvist and Morgan Ericsson (2009). “Dealing with stakeholders in Mobile Learning: A study of three initiatives” — Proceedings of the 32nd Information Systems Research
Seminar in Scandinavia (IRIS’32).
Publication VII Anna Wingkvist and Morgan Ericsson (2009). “Sharing experience from three initiatives in mobile learning: lessons
learned” — Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Computers in Education (ICCE 2009).
Publication VIII Anna Wingkvist and Morgan Ericsson (2009). “Current practice in mobile learning: a survey of research method and
purpose” — Proceedings of the 8th World Conference on Mobile
Learning (mLearn 2009), pp. 103–111.
4.1 Publication I
This publication presents a field study and survey of how podcasts, digital
audio files, can be used to supplement university level courses. Podcasting
can be used as a highly mobile learning aid, one that some universities were
fast to adopt.
The audio-only format offers the possibility to listen to podcasts while
doing other activities, and thus offering students a way to extend the number of hours they study without imposing on the time they need for other
activities, such as commuting, household chores, or physical exercise. However, by combining learning with such activities, it is necessary to be aware
of distractions, the inability to take notes or look up references, etc.
In order to see if podcasts could be utilized “on the go,” an experiment
was performed where weekly podcasts were offered on two first-year courses
in computer science. The format of the podcasts varied in order to measure
what the students preferred.
The experiment shows that podcasts can be a low-effort and effective
supplement to regular lectures. It is however important to keep them short
and to the point. In a similar sense, the critical point is to deal with any
technical problems quickly and aggressively, so that if they occur, not to
make students lose faith in the idea and its realization.
30
4.2 Publication II
The publication presents a description of the experiment as well as an
analysis of the questionnaires. It also summarizes the most important
lessons learned from the experiment in a list of do’s and dont’s.
The main contribution is an understanding of the difficulties of trialing
a mobile learning aid for a large-scale audience and designing a learning
scenario, tying the location, the learning experience, and the task together.
4.2 Publication II
Risks, in information systems development refer to unsatisfactory outcomes,
such as poor quality or budget overruns. A great deal of effort has been
put into means, such as theoretical (conceptual) models to assess and control risks. This publication studies the problems suffered by many mobile
learning initiatives, often due to unforeseen events, and relates these events
to risks in an attempt to benefit from risk management.
In order to study what risks mobile learning initiatives experience, several
projects are studied from different angles. First, interviews were conducted
with project managers. The outcome from the interviews was used to create
a questionnaire that was sent to all the project managers within a major
European network for mobile learning research. They were asked to answer questions related to risks experienced within their most current but
finished project as well as to name all publications from that project. The
questionnaire had a response rate of 50% (i.e., 15 project managers), and
28 publications were listed.
To analyze the questionnaire and publications in order to find and classify
risks a risk assessment model was used. Initiatives in mobile learning can
be considered socio-technical, since they aim to develop learning activities
supported by technology and, in turn, a model for socio-technical systems
should be used for the analysis. This publication used a pre-existing risk
model (originally based on Leavitt’s diamond). The risk assessment model
contains four components, Technology, Task, Actors, and Structure, as well
as the six relations between these for classifying risks. One risk could, for
example, be placed in the interaction between Actors and Technology.
The analysis of the questionnaire and publications identifies a number of
risks that can be classified according to the model. This suggests that a
risk assessment before the project should find at least some of the risks experienced, and dealing with the risks beforehand might result in improved
sustainability. However, the research also finds that the model is quite demanding and difficult to use. Many of the risks that were found in the
publications and the questionnaire related to interactions between one or
more components, but it was hard to pinpoint one such interaction – since
most related to several interactions – and a classification resulted in approximations. In order for the model to be useful to mobile learning researchers
it should be adapted to better suit the research field.
The main contribution is pointing out the mismatch when using a risk
31
4 Overview of Research Efforts
assessment model from the socio-technical perspective in respect to mobile
learning initiatives.
4.3 Publication III
In this publication the evolution of a mobile learning initiative is considered
to consist of four stages, Idea, Trial, Project, and Release. Each of these four
stages represents a prototype that should be validated within the stage. In
order to better reason about the activities during the evolution the concepts
of Scalability and Sustainability are introduced. Scalability refers to the
transition from one stage to the next, i.e., considering and making all the
changes that are required. Sustainability refers to the validation within each
stage, a stage that works according to some predetermined specification
being considered sustainable in that stage. An initiative that reaches the
Release stage and is sustainable there is considered a sustainable initiative.
Scalability concerns evolving from one stage to the next. This includes
planning what to change, considering how these changes will affect the initiative, and on this basis either carrying out the changes or returning to
planning it again. It is important to consider the effect of the changes and
how they propagate throughout the initiative. The changes will form a
ripple effect and even those that seem to have little effect on the end product, such as moving from one technical platform to another, might cause a
number of unanticipated changes. Scalability concerns both realizing how
a change will ripple through the initiative as well as how to limit its effect.
Sustainability is important in relation to scalability, as sustainability defines the beginning and end of scalability. An initiative can only scale once
the current stage is sustainable, since it is impossible to plan changes to
an unstable stage. The scaling effects are not over until sustainability is
reached. Scalability is also important to sustainability, since the former
becomes the means of achieving the latter.
The main contribution is the discussion of scalability and sustainability
and their relation as a means of achieving sound mobile learning initiatives.
4.4 Publication IV
This publication presents a study of the development practices of an initiative that used podcasts to supplement lectures in higher education. Data
was gathered using the iterative cycles of the action research approach. The
empirical material was analyzed which resulted in a framework that shows
how sustainability and scalability are linked. The framework also shows how
an initiative is developed from Idea, to Trial, to Project, to Release, and
how each of these stages can be described using the four areas of concern,
namely, Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization.
Drawing on the experience from a specific mobile learning initiative to
define a framework that is then used to conceptualize the development pro32
4.5 Publication V
cess is a way to bring together practice, theory, and research, and thus
provide reliable evidence for the framework itself. The framework captures
the development and the relevant context in a unified theoretical attempt
and is suitable for practitioners, i.e., people that are actively engaged in
and dealing with initiatives in the field of mobile learning.
The main contribution of this publication is to present both the motivation behind and the framework.
4.5 Publication V
In this publication a meta-model (i.e., a framework) is presented to describe
the development practices of mobile learning initiatives. These initiatives
are often small-scale trials that are not integrated into the intended setting
but instead carried out outside of the setting. This results in sustainability
issues, i.e., problems to integrate the results of the initiative as real learning
aids. In order to address the sustainability issues and, in turn, help to understand how to scale up, a framework is introduced. The framework was
used to describe and analyze a specific mobile learning initiative, an initiative where supplementary material was delivered to undergraduate students
through the use of podcasts.
The framework presented consists of two dimensions, namely evolution
and areas of concern. The evolution describes how an initiatives evolves
through four distinct stages: Idea, Trial, Project and Release, and the areas
of concern is a means to reduce complexity by grouping issues into four
problem situations views: Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization.
Each of these stages and areas has a special meaning. For example, Trial
represents a small-scale test and Technology addresses all the issues and
problems relating to, for example, hardware and software. The concept of
Focus is used to guide the development process and show what is important
during each stage, and the Equilibrium concept is used to deal with the
iterative development that happens within each stage. The notion of Scalability is the transition between two stages, and the notion of Sustainability
is the measure of how well an initiative solves the problem it was intended
to solve and how well it fits the setting.
The main contribution of this publication is to present the framework in
a neat “package”, fast to read and in an easily accessible format targeted
especially to the mobile learning community while also opening up towards
researchers in the overall Technology-Enhanced Learning (TEL) field.
4.6 Publication VI
This publication presents a study of three initiatives in mobile learning,
which were compared with regard to how stakeholders were dealt with. It
is acknowledged that the work to identify and access the relevant stakeholders is inherently difficult and with this follows a magnitude of factors
33
4 Overview of Research Efforts
to consider. The goal of these initiatives is to reach a viable design for
the initiatives as such and for the outcome to match the intended audience. Reaching a viable design can only be done by a sound development
practices. It is shown in this field study that these mobile learning initiatives often follow an evolutionary life-cycle where the information system is
constructed, evaluated, and refined in increments.
During this, the stakeholders and their needs might change, so even if
there was an initial understanding, it might not be correct after one or
more increments. Further, the initiatives dealt with stakeholders differently
in getting their input but essentially identified and interacted with stakeholder groups in an on-demand fashion, taking them in turn, and locking
down requirements in steps. In other words, new groups of stakeholders are
considered when needed, and this leads to development practices that are
a mix between the sequential and the evolutionary life-cycles, which results
in inflexible information systems solutions. In order to improve on this,
stakeholders need to be regarded in a more inclusive fashion, whereby they
are considered as part of the entire development process.
The main contribution of this publication is to explicitly compare and
understand how stakeholder analysis were dealt with as part of the system
development practices.
4.7 Publication VII
This publication presents lessons learned from three mobile learning initiatives. Past experiences provide an important source of new knowledge.
By reflecting on what happened previously others can avoid repeating the
same mistakes. Studies of published results in the field of mobile learning
show that they often revolve around isolated technologies and report on
specific small-scale trials rather than making broad reflections on practice
and outcome.
In connecting longitudinal and accumulating experience involving three
initiatives in this field study, the main point of the investigation is on the
development practices. Even though, or because, the initiatives had different aims and used different technologies and approaches to learning, the
crystallized and overarching lessons learned can serve as considerations or
guidelines for other researchers when starting new initiatives in the same
field.
The study identifies a number of concerns where one or more of the three
initiatives experienced difficulties. The three initiatives took different approaches to deal with the these problems, depending on the approach and
the aim of the initiative. For instance, two of the initiatives relied on
custom-made software, developed exclusively for the initiative, while the
third initiative exclusively used commercially available technology. The latter approach is less flexible, but might prove cheaper and experience less
difficulties. The extracted considerations are presented as lessons learned.
34
4.8 Publication VIII
In summary, the lessons learned and guidelines revolve around the basis of
technology, spanning over connectivity aspects and data management, continuing with scenario building, the choice and design of evaluation method,
and co-operation with stakeholders.
The main contribution of this publication is the presentation of lessons
learned, extracted from three longitudinally conducted studies, compared
and analyzed in respect from an information systems development perspective.
4.8 Publication VIII
In this publication a literature review was conducted to better understand
research conducted in the field of mobile learning. Papers were classified
according to two dimensions, research method and research purpose. The
research purposes considered were Describing, Developing, Understanding,
and Evaluating. The research methods considered were Case study, Field
study, Action research, Experiment study, Survey research, Basic research,
Applied research, and Normative research. In order to capture current
research the review targeted the conference proceedings of mLearn 2007
and 2008, which in total consist of 76 full papers. Each paper was analyzed
in depth by more than one person and classified according to purposes
and methods. Many of the papers can be classified as having a number
of purposes or methods, but the most coherent and dominant from each
category were selected to classify the paper according to the two dimensions,
respectively.
The survey found that, generally, the research conducted is either close
to one situation in particular, gathering empirical data and describing it, or
presents ways to utilize the essence of mobile learning in an abstract sense
on a normative level. These two represent opposite ends of the spectrum,
given method and purpose choice, and out of the 76 papers considered in
this survey, 51 papers fall into either of these (67%). The prevalence of
gathering empirical data and the research that is conducted to describe a
phenomenon show a strong connection to real-world cases.
A great deal of the research conducted is done to describe how the real
world works and is often presented as the result of a small-scale study
with a population using mobile technology for learning reasons. This data
is presented, not interpreted, and offered as a description of the learning
process. At the other end of the spectrum there is normative research,
which is also conducted with the purpose to describe and develop. Many
of the papers that fall into this category present either a description of a
current situation or a future situation describing what may happen or how
something should be developed.
The main contribution of this publication is to present and collate current
research practice in the field of mobile learning.
35
4 Overview of Research Efforts
4.9 Summary
The aim of the research presented in this thesis is to form a better understanding of the development practice in mobile learning and to contribute
to the same. Each one of the eight appended publications contributes to
this goal on their own. However, two main tracks can be distinguishable in
the research. First, a study of the field of mobile learning was needed to
gain an understanding of the area and the problems experienced. Secondly,
to address the problems raised, a possible solution was provided.
For instance, the five publication that studied current research and development practice together form a larger picture of the field. By studying
the development practice from different perspectives, using different data
sources and methods, a more complete picture of this field can be formed.
In contrast, the three publications relating to the framework, the main
contribution of this thesis, paints a larger picture in a similar way. Publication III introduces the importance of scalability and sustainability, but does
not consider how they came to be. Publication IV, on the other hand, gives
a detailed account of the construction of the framework and the theory the
framework is based upon, while Publication V introduces the framework on
an accessible level.
The eight publications also form together a map of how the research proceeded, from the practical fieldwork, through reflection, to the formulation
of a framework (i.e., a theoretical contribution).
36
Chapter 5
Discussion
This chapter discusses how the research presented in the appended publications (summarized in Chapter 4) addresses the research questions posed in
Chapter 1. Some of the publications relate to more than one question. Table 5.1 shows how the questions and publications are related. Given the first
research question this chapter starts with addressing how current research
in mobile learning can be described, especially in regard to the development practice. In respect to the second research question the difference
between information systems development and mobile learning is discussed.
The third research question regards how knowledge from the field of information systems research and practice can be related to and applied within
mobile learning. In order to address this question concepts found during the
analysis of the practice within the mobile learning initiatives and how these
can be related to information systems development are discussed. In answer
to research question four, a number of findings are presented from a more
theoretical perspective to a more practical level. And in the last section a
framework is presented to correspond to the researchers and practitioners
in the field of mobile learning.
# Question Discussed in Publication
1 What are the current research approaches and practices in the field of
mobile learning?
I, II, VI, VII, and VIII
2 How are practices in information systems development and mobile learning
related??
II, III, and IV
3 How can knowledge (research and practice) from information systems development support mobile learning?
II, III, IV, V, VI, and VII
4 How can the results of this research
be brought back to the researchers
and practitioners in the mobile learning
community?
I, III, IV, V, and VII
Table 5.1: Research Questions in Relation to Publications.
37
5 Discussion
5.1 Current Research in Mobile Learning in
Terms of Development Practice
Mobile learning is still a young field and the innovation is driven by research
initiatives. This means that a great deal of the development happens as
part of these research initiatives and in turn that the IT artifacts produced
might affect the research outcome. In order to better understand if this is
the case, a study of research publications was conducted to better understand the method and purpose of mobile learning research. The survey in
Publication VIII shows that a large number of mobile learning initiatives
involve studies of technology, for example using field studies, with the aim to
describe it. A typical research publication might describe how students use
artifacts developed by the research team to accomplish some learning goal,
but without evaluating the learning. This suggests that poor development
practice might indeed affect the outcome of the entire research initiative.
In order to better understand how the development within these research
initiatives happens, several of them were studied and the empirical material
gathered was studied from different perspectives.
Publication II presents a study of 15 projects from the perspective of
which problems they experienced during and after the development. Publication I takes a different approach and studies the conception phase of a
mobile learning initiative. This study focuses on the initial investigations of
the research team and their effort to better understand the problem area.
In Publication VI and Publication VII three different initiatives are studied
in order to investigate how they developed from conception to implementation. Publication VI takes a close look at stakeholder interaction during the
development, while Publication VII takes a wider look at how a number of
issues are dealt with during the development, including stakeholders.
The empirical material and the analysis carried out reveal that there is
seldom a well-defined development process. Most of the development is exploratory, where prototypes are produced, evaluated, and improved. There
is seldom any clear understanding of the actual stakeholders, and as Publication VI shows, stakeholders are handled on an ad hoc basis and involved
when needed in the development process. The post-mortem risk analysis
performed in Publication II shows that such an analysis can prove helpful, but the analysis of the development practices in the initiatives reveals
that only a partial and ad hoc risk analysis was performed. An example
of such an ad hoc risk analysis is the initial questionnaires used during the
conception of the podcast initiative, as presented in Publication I.
The analysis of the research and development in mobile learning shows
that the outcomes of research initiatives are potentially dependent on the IT
artifacts produced, and that the development practices for producing these
IT artifacts is generally done ad hoc. This can result in non-conclusive,
or even questionable, research outcomes. The mobile learning initiative in
Publication I shows a typical example of this, where the poor quality of
38
5.2 Relating Mobile Learning and Information Systems Development Practice
Structure
People
Technology
Tasks
Social
system
Technical
system
Figure 5.1: A Socio-Technical System.
a service (a server crash) used resulted in the loss of research data (made
downloads impossible and consequently no data-logs). The repercussion
could also inflict on the attitude towards further use of the service even
after it was restored and back online. Hence, by improving, or at least
defining the development practices maybe such issues can be avoided.
5.2 Relating Mobile Learning and Information
Systems Development Practice
A great deal of effort has been put into understanding IT artifacts are developed and introduced into organizations. There is a wide range of both
research results and practical considerations involved. In order to investigate how these relate to mobile learning, there is a need to understand how
mobile learning and information systems development are related. This
requires a better understanding of mobile learning in general, in particular how and why research and development are conducted within mobile
learning, and how the systems produced are supposed to be used.
Chapter 2 discusses how the development of both mobile learning and
information systems started as a technology-oriented activity and was later
considered to have both technology and social dimensions. Mobile learning
can be considered a socio-technical system with mobile phones and software as the technology dimension and learners and schools as the social
dimension, for example.
According to Bostrom and Heinen (1977), a socio-technical system consists of the two dimensions, social and technical, which are divided into
People and Structure, and Technology and Tasks, respectively. Figure 5.1
depicts this view of a socio-technical system. Addressing mobile learning
using this view, the learning goal would belong to the Tasks, the pedagogy would be considered Technology, and many of the stakeholders, such
as learners and their parents, would be considered People. This view of a
socio-technical system does not correspond that well to mobile learning as
discussed in Chapter 2.
One major goal of mobile learning is to allow the learners to be mobile
39
5 Discussion
Structure
People
Tasks Technology
Social
system
Technical
system
Personal
system
Figure 5.2: An Extended Socio-Technical System for Mobile Learning.
in time and space, and make the learning more personal (Kukulska-Hulme
and Traxler, 2005). Learning is individual and different individuals learn
in different ways. Merrill et al. (1996) state “groups don’t learn, individuals learn. Learners may be part of a group while learning, learners may
learn from one another, and the social context of a learning environment
may provide support for its members; nevertheless the change in cognitive
structure and the acquisition of knowledge and skill is an individual event”
(p. 2). For example, some people may pick up something quickly, while
others need to repeat the exercise several times trying different strategies.
Some may understand, for example, mathematical concepts from reading
about it in a book, others may need to do several exercises. Mobile learning
should support all the learners and offer the opportunity to learn in their
own way, as far as possible.
The individual and personal nature of learning is visible in a study of the
development and outcomes of mobile learning initiatives. Publication II
contains examples of this, for example “student ownership and 24/7 access
to a handheld device are central to the approach”, and further along this line
“where students had constant use of the mobile devices, there was evidence
of a growing sense of autonomy, as students created their own uses to meet
personal purposes”.
The socio-technical system view depicted in Figure 5.1 does not contradict
the view that learning is personal and individual, but it does not promote
it either. The division into pedagogical theory as technology, the learning
goal as task, and the learner as one of the stakeholders gives a fragmented
view of the learning. In order to deal with this, an extended view of mobile
learning is suggested that places learning into a personal system and puts
the same emphasis on it as the social and technical. Figure 5.2 depicts this
extended view.
The new extended view introduces a personal system that contains the
Tasks. In this view, Tasks is synonymous with the process of learning. The
Technology contains all the technology, such as mobile phones and software
that support the learning. The classification of People has been changed to
not include the learner, but instead refer to other people he or she interacts
with, such as classmates and teachers.
40
5.3 Mobile Learning Development Supported by Information Systems Development
5.3 Mobile Learning Development Supported
by Information Systems Development
The previous section introduced an extended socio-technical system for mobile learning. However, the main change is that the learning, i.e., the task,
has moved from a technical perspective to a personal one, focusing on the
individual nature of learning. This means that People, Structure, and Technology are unaffected, and hence, models and methods developed for sociotechnical systems might still be applicable, at least to concerns that fall
within these.
5.3.1 Methods and Models from Information Systems
Development
In order to test whether some socio-technical models were still applicable, two studies were conducted. In one of these, three initiatives were
studied in regard to how they managed stakeholders in respect to the participatory traditions of socio-technical systems design. The stakeholders
analysis, i.e., Publication VI, show that while each initiative had a slightly
different approach to stakeholders, the overall approach can be described
as “when needed, and in turn”. Stakeholders were asked in sequence, and
decisions were made before all stakeholders were consulted. This resulted
in mismatches later on. By inviting stakeholders to participate in the design process and thus adopting a stance towards stakeholders similar to
the one advocated by socio-technical systems design, the mismatches might
have been avoided, since all stakeholders would have been consulted before
requirements and consequently decisions were locked down.
The second study focused on a socio-technical model for risk analysis,
so Publication II uses empirical material gathered from 15 mobile learning
initiatives as a basis for such an analysis. The model by Lyytinen et al.
(1998) considers risks in Technology, Task, Social, and Structure, and in
the relations between these. With the application of the model a number of
risks were discovered , and these found support in the results reported by
the initiatives. The study found that while the model could be used, there
were a number of issues involved in mapping the initiatives to it. This is
supported by the discussion in the previous section, as it was problematic
and unintuitive to deal with pedagogical approaches as Technology, for example. The model also felt overly complicated, and it was difficult to map
risks to one out of the six possible relations. This, however, is a concern
related to the model, and not due to the socio-technical view itself.
The results suggest that some practice from socio-technical system is applicable to mobile learning. The continued investigation studies the practice
that is found in the field of mobile learning and relates this to concepts and
knowledge found in the field of information systems development.
41
5 Discussion
5.3.2 Finding Concepts in Mobile Learning
The previous section discussed how methods from information systems development could be used for the development of mobile learning. This section focuses on concepts found in information systems development methodologies.
An important part of an information systems development methodology is
the life-cycle model. In their ideal form, life-cycle models can be regarded
as sequential or iterative. There are many variations, but in essence the
idea is to either progress through a specified number of stages or to repeat
a specified number of stages until the end goal is reached.
When observing the development of mobile learning initiatives, it was
found to be highly iterative, but with well defined progressions in terms of
various steps. Based on observations, four major stages can be identified
namely Idea, Trial, Project, and Release. Any mobile learning initiative
should progress through these. Each stage represents a specific activity
and specific goals. For example, the Trial stage revolves around testing the
prototypes in a controlled environment with limited groups (this stage was
called Experiment in Publication III but used synonymously). A stage can
contain several iterative development cycles and a large number of actual
trials. When a stage is considered finished, i.e., the results are satisfactory,
the stage is over. It is generally difficult to go back and repeat a previous
stage, so progress from one stage to another should only happen once it is
“completed”.
A sequential life-cycle makes late changes very expensive. When summarizing lessons learned from Multiview, Avison et al. (1998), state that the
sequential life-cycle is inappropriate for describing the development practice. However, Avison et al. (1998), also found that an iterative life-cycle
can be difficult to use since it lacks a well-defined progression. In order to
support an iterative life-cycle as well, each stage can be thought of as containing a number of iterations. The life-cycle is iterative inside each stage,
but sequential over the four stages specified.
The extended socio-technical system for mobile learning presented in Section 5.2 consists of three systems, the social, the personal and the technical.
These three systems exist in each of the four stages of the mobile learning
life-cycle. To incorporate them and make the visible, each stage is divided
into four Areas of concern. The additional area is created by dividing the
social system into Social (People) and Organization (Structure). The other
two areas are Technology (Technology) and Learning (Tasks). Technology
is the hardware and software used, Learning includes the pedagogy and
teaching goals, while Social includes how students and teachers use and
interact using the technology. Organization represents the organizational
concerns, for example laws and regulations, and school policy. The name
areas of concern is inspired by Checkland (1999b) and how he reasons about
a problem situation.
The areas of concern can be considered as views. Each area of concern
42
5.3 Mobile Learning Development Supported by Information Systems Development
deals with a specific aspect of mobile learning and can be linked to a specific
group of stakeholders. Since the four areas of concern represents different
views on the same IT artifact, they are interlinked. A change to one of the
areas will affect the others. For example, consider that there is a request to
move the podcast initiative (presented in Publication I) from audio only to
include video. At a technical level, this might be easy since many devices
include video capabilities these days, but it would affect the learning since
video cannot be used as easily while “on the move”. Similarly, it would
require video recoding and editing software and hardware, as well as server
support to distribute the video. By discussing how any decision will affect
the four areas of concern, there is a built-in analysis of how a decision affects
stakeholders and what possible risks it might create.
The areas of concern support the iterative development practices within a
stage. Changes will propagate between the areas, and result in new changes
that will propagate in turn. However, as discussed previously, there is no
defined progression, and the propagating changes may make it more complex. In order to deal with this, mediation between the areas of concern is
needed. The concept of focus is introduced in order to provide mediation
and reduce complexity. This is inspired by Avison and Wood-Harper (2003)
reasoning about mediation using the metaphor of a camera (for more details
see Publication IV). Using focus it is possible to see all four areas at the
same time, but only by sacrificing the level of resolution. So, it is possible to
focus on and examine one particular area in great detail, but at the expense
of losing some of the greater context, which is depicted by Figure 5.3, where
the Social area of concern is in focus.
The use of focus in relation to the areas of concern provides a sequential
progression. Each area of concern is focused on in turn, and the main
development objectives revolve around that area. Changes to one area will
still affect the others and need to be managed, however, by only focusing
on one area — one potential source of change — a sequential progression is
maintained and complexity is reduced.
In order to deal with the interlinked areas of concern and the propagating
effects that a suggested change will have, the notion of equilibrium is introduced. This is similar to Leavitt’s model for organizational change (Leavitt,
1965) where the term equilibrium is used to signify that the opposing forces
of a change are in a steady state, i.e., the effects of the change have been
compensated for. The term is used in a similar manner here, where it signifies that a change has propagated to all related areas of concern and that
each area has been adjusted to deal with the change. To continue the example with video podcasts, any stage where the effects of introducing video
to one or more areas are ignored will not be in equilibrium. A system that
is not in equilibrium will contain risks not assessed that might result in a
failure to obtain any or all of the benefits of the IT artifact at a later stage.
Since there might be risks not considered in a stage that is not in equilibrium, it is not possible to progress to the next stage before equilibrium is
reached.
43
5 Discussion
Social
Figure 5.3: Focus on the Social Area of Concern.
The steps and exploratory development used by mobile learning initiatives contain a growth process. They transition through several stages,
starting from a few users with mock-up prototypes to larger groups with
real hardware and software. The users early on might be members of the
development team while the users later on will be closer to the target audience. In essence, each change to either of these variables changes the scope.
Consider the research initiative in Publication I where podcasts were used as
learning aids and the production of podcasts needed to be supported. When
the initiative grew to include teachers outside of the team that started the
initiative, there was a need to support them by providing hardware and
software to record audio as well as assistance in using these. The growth
process, or rather the ability to scale up is an important part of the exploratory development used in mobile learning initiatives.
In the field of Computer Science the term scalability is considered a quality of, for example, a network or a system. If an information system is not
scalable, it cannot handle an increase of factors. The understanding of scalability is often vague or subjective, but a number of research efforts to define
this notion have been carried out. Laitinen et al. (2000), in addition to
Weinstock and Goodenough (2006), give a good overview of the underlying
concepts and problems of scalability in information systems development.
Bondi (2000), in relation to an information system, judges how scalable
it is when the information system needs to accommodate to changes, for
example a higher demand in terms of more users or hardware.
Scalability can be considered as the initiative’s ability to grow. This
growth, in respect to all the four areas of concern should be able to handle
the different types and groups of users and organizations with everything
that this entails. There will always be a point at which scalability stops
making sense, i.e., the largest rational organization it can scale to or a
“market” that can be “controlled”. Using this description, scalability can be
defined as the ability to reach a state that matches the pre-set requirements
at a development stage (more addressed in Publication III). The more stages
at which it reaches these, the more scalable the initiative is. In this respect,
saying that a mobile learning initiative is scaled to the Project stage simply
means that the initiative reached a state in accordance with the specified
variables at the Idea, Trial, and Project stages. The components were in
unison with each other at each stage.
The term sustainability is defined by Eckersley (1998) as the ability to
continue an activity or maintain a certain condition indefinitely. Black
(2004), in connotation to communities and societies, says that sustainability
44
5.3 Mobile Learning Development Supported by Information Systems Development
Stages The development of a mobile learning initiative
goes through a number of Stages. Mobile learning
initiatives go through a development process that
can be summarized using the following four stages:
Idea, Trial, Project, and Release.
Areas of Concern Each stage deals with a number of concerns or
requirements that deal with different aspects of
the mobile learning initiative. There exist an interplay of technical, pedagogical, people-related,
and bureaucratically considerations and these are
called, in short, the following areas of concern:
Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization.
Focus Focus is a way of reducing complexity. Each stage
deals with the areas of concern, but it was found
that certain areas are more prominent during certain stages. By applying focus on particular areas,
these provide the primary concerns to investigate.
Equilibrium The concept of Equilibrium is the measure of
when the inner development process has reached
a “final” state. When all the concerns within a
stage, both those within areas in focus and those
indirectly affected by the focused areas are in balance, equilibrium has been achieved.
Scalability Scalability indicates how well the initiative is able
to grow. When an initiative reaches equilibrium
at one stage and is able to refine or add to the
considerations within the areas of concern that
should be dealt with in the next stage, it can then
transition from one stage to the next. Scalability
is the measure of how many such transitions the
initiative can accomplish.
Sustainability Sustainability is the measure of how well the result
fits the intended setting. An initiative that has
reached a stage with realistic and “final” concerns
and reached equilibrium at this stage is considered
sustainable.
Table 5.2: The Key Concepts Summarized.
45
5 Discussion
is being increasingly seen as involving three interrelated dimensions: the
economic, the social, and the ecological. When applied to systems in a
general sense it relies on Beer (1984), who states that a viable system in
order to survive needs to be organized in a way to meet the demands of
an ever-changing environment. The Darwinian saying survival of the fittest,
from his theory of natural selection comes to mind, and a living system
needs to be able to maintain a separate existence over time.
Traxler and Kukulska-Hulme (2005) discusses sustainability in relation
to mobile learning. The end product (i.e., the information system) of a
mobile learning initiative needs to be stand-alone in relation to its creators
and sustain an existence by itself in the intended setting. A sustainable
mobile learning initiative would be one that reaches the last stage, i.e., the
Release stage, and is incorporated into the targeted environment. The goal
is a mobile learning initiative that survives on its own merits and adapts to
changes in the environment. By combining the definitions of scalability and
sustainability, sustainability is the same as “maximum” scalability. The key
concepts are summarized in Table 5.2 (Additionally, see Publication IV).
5.4 Contributing Back to Researchers and Practitioners in Mobile Learning
The discussion in relation to the first and second questions deals with what
mobile learning is and how the research is conducted. The third research
question involved both direct practical lessons learned, such as keeping the
podcasts short, as well as how the practice can be strengthened by knowledge from the field of information systems development to form new concepts, such as Focus. Considering the nature of these results, there are
three ways to present the results of this research: as new theoretical contributions, as a framework for mobile learning development, or as a set of
guidelines and/or lessons learned.
From the studies of previous initiatives and the discussions in the appended publications there is a diverse set of researchers and stakeholders
to mobile learning that in turn can be considered practitioners. There are
developers, students, teachers, school administrators, and so on. The framework should be suitable, understandable, and useful to each of these groups.
5.4.1 The Three Categories of Contributions
New theoretical contributions, such as the extended socio-technical system
for mobile learning, are more aimed at the research community of mobile
learning. The main consumers of such a result would be the researchers
working towards conceptual modeling, such as the ones discussed in Chapter 2, seeking theoretical foundations and communication platforms for their
work. While the conceptual models would expand the theoretical foundations of the field, they will contribute to the practitioners of the field via
46
5.4 Contributing Back to Researchers and Practitioners in Mobile Learning
the researchers. Hence, the results might find their way to the practitioners and thus improve communication and collaboration in the development
practices.
At the other end of the spectrum there are the guidelines and the lessons
learned, such as the ones given in Publication I. These are often presented in
the form of do’s and dont’s, speaking directly to other practitioners such as
teachers. They represent knowledge that is easy to access and understand,
but might prove hard to put into practice. For example, consider “involve
the stakeholders” and “keep the podcasts short”. While they are offered on
two different levels, they both prove hard to use effectively. Other issues
concern how to relate various lessons learned to each other, or to deal with
the large number of guidelines and lessons learned that are bound to be produced. They are, however, the quickest form to bring results and reflections
back to the community. Publication VII is an example of this.
Checkland (1999b) made a point of saying that the intention behind the
activity of research is to establish well-founded knowledge about the world
and about the phenomena happening in the world. He continues stating
that the incorporation of scientific conduct in our (Western) culture has
muddled the distinction between theory and practice (craft), and the combination of the two. So, to de-muddle it to three categories, theory is
considered a scientific contribution, guidelines and lessons learned for more
practical appliance, and in combination a framework can be placed. Hence,
the framework is based on theory and presents the theory in a manner that
could in turn, via researchers, be accessible to practitioners. It is not as accessible as guidelines and lessons learned, but is on the other hand based on
theoretical constructs that can be re-used for a large number of situations.
The framework addresses the concerns of the theoretical contributions as
well as the guidelines and lessons learned. In a sense, the framework represents the best of theory and craft, and is a suitable way to present the
findings of this research to the mobile learning community.
5.4.2 Bringing Forward a Framework
In order to present the findings of the research in this thesis, a framework
was formulated that includes all the concepts formulated in the previous
section (and summarized in Table 5.2). In order to support the various
groups of researchers and practitioners in mobile learning, the framework
was created with a focus on the philosophy (cf. Chapter 2), while not
focusing so much on the actual tools, methods, and models. There are
simply too many such tools, methods, and models to include, and given the
diversity it is hard to recommend some before others. Important aspects
mentioned previously in this thesis, such as stakeholder analysis and risk
management are part of the philosophy of the framework, and will be part
of the development of any initiative using the framework. Researchers and
practitioners are, however, free to specialize the use of the framework to
suit their exact needs by providing their own models, methods, and tools.
47
5 Discussion
Stage Purpose Outcome Key Activities
Idea
Establish soundness of the Plan of how to go ahead Investigate technology
idea Investigate feasibility
Establish technical platform Surveys
Trial
Test the idea Information about what Produce learning material
Elaborate the learning works and what does not Offer the learning material
Small scale testing Considerations made on what Measure how well it is
needs to change in order to received
move ahead
Project
Expand beyond initiators Information on how the Similar to trial but larger
Large scale testing material is received, both in scale
Formalized in terms of terms of students and Report to funding
resources and outcome teachers experience organization
Establish social interplay
Release
Hand over to target Implemented and in use Integrate into the
organization organization (training)
Remove reliance on initiators Establish facilities (servers,
studios, etc)
Table 5.3: An Overview of the Development Stages.
The framework consists of a life-cycle that divides an initiative into four
stages: Idea, Trial, Project, and Release. The purpose and key activities
of each stage are summarized in Table 5.3. Each stage is divided into four
Areas of concern: Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization. These
represent the four major groups of stakeholders as well as the four main
sources of risks. The four areas are linked together and depend on each
other. A change to one will affect the others. In order to reason about
these propagating changes, the concept of Equilibrium is used to reason
about the state of a stage. If a stage is in equilibrium, all changes have
propagated and the effects of this propagation have been dealt with (or at
least considered). Equilibrium is reached for a stage when there is no longer
a need for reaction and adjustment.
The concept of Scalability discusses how to evolve from one stage to the
next in the life-cycle with the focus on what will change and how to deal with
those changes. A large part of scalability is to limit the scope of the change,
i.e., to minimize the ripple effects. Scalability means the ability to extend
the results from the previous stage and combine them with knowledge of the
areas of concern of the next stage. The concept of Sustainability is a means
to reason about both an individual stage and the entire initiative. A stage
is sustainable if it adheres to the pre-set specification and is in equilibrium.
An initiative is sustainable, if the Release stage is sustainable.
In order to reduce the complexity introduced by the areas of concern and
the propagating changes, the concept of Focus is used. During each stage
of the evolution, one (or at most a few) area of concern is in focus. The
area in focus represents the area where the development is currently the
most active, and where the direct changes will occur. The other areas are
only changed through propagated effects of a change to the area in focus.
Focus thus provides a means to reduce complexity and a way to introduce
48
5.4 Contributing Back to Researchers and Practitioners in Mobile Learning
Idea Trial Project Release
Stages
Areas of Concern
Technology Learning Organi Social zation
Focus
Figure 5.4: The Life-Cycle and the Areas of Concern.
a sequential work-flow to the framework.
Figure 5.4 depicts the framework and the major concepts. For a more
detailed discussion of these concepts and the framework, refer to Section 5.3
or publications IV and V.
By bringing forth a framework that provides stakeholder and risk management as part of the framework, and by presenting a mix of sequential
and an iterative life-cycle, that describes the development from conception
to implementation (Idea to Release), the researchers and practitioners are
free to use the models, methods, and tools that they are familiar with. The
major role of the framework is to guide the development practices not to tie
down the models, methods, and tools, which follows while the framework is
in use. Hence, the framework is there to be a work and communication platform and provide a theoretical take on the information systems development
occurring in mobile learning.
49

Chapter 6
Conclusions
The driving hypothesis that guided the work presented in this thesis is that
sustainability issues experienced by mobile learning initiatives are mainly
due to the lack of a systematic approach to development. In order to verify this hypothesis and to contribute to the development practice, several
studies into mobile learning initiatives were conducted. A substantial number of data sources were investigated and empirical materials were collected
using several methods (i.e., the triangulation of methods). The analysis of
the empirical materials revealed two major insights. First, as most of the
initiatives in mobile learning are research driven (i.e., researchers constitute
the core team) and aim to contribute new understanding of mobile learning,
the development practice may affect the outcome. Hence, a sound understanding of the development process is important to the research outcome.
Secondly, the extended team is populated by a variety of people (i.e., practitioners). These practitioners, including teachers and learners, are often not
included in the development process. As discussed in Chapter 2, user participation is important to capture social interactions, which in turn might
improve the sustainability.
In order to support researchers and practitioners in mobile learning, the
experience and insights gained from the analysis of the empirical materials
were used to elaborate and suggest a framework to aid in the process of mobile learning development. This framework includes theoretical knowledge
from the field of information systems development combined with practical considerations and concepts found from analyzing practices within the
field mobile learning. The empirical material analyzed was gathered from
both first-hand experience and analysis of other researchers work, i.e., a
triangulation of investigators.
The proposed framework divides the development of mobile learning into
four sequential stages: Idea, Trial, Project, and Release each of which consists of iterative development cycles. Each stage is associated with four
Areas of concern: Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization, to help
reduce complexity and make stakeholder analysis and risk assessment implicit to the framework. The sustainability of a mobile learning initiative is
linked to the concept of scalability — the ability to grow according to preset requirements. Focus and equilibrium are two central concepts that are
used to reduce complexity and aid in regulating the evolutionary process.
51
6 Conclusions
The aim of the suggested framework is to present this information systems
development approach in a way that is accessible and useful to researchers
and practitioners in the field of mobile learning. By doing so, the framework
might be used as a guiding instrument helping mobile learning initiatives
to become more sustainable. The next section first looks in retrospective
in order to summarize the main results, and then sees forwards to outline
research challenges to be addressed in future work.
6.1 Main Contributions
This thesis contributed to the mobile learning research community on three
different levels; theoretically, practically, and a combination of those.
The survey of research methods and purposes in mobile learning contributed to a better understanding of how and why research is conducted
(Publication VIII). This understanding shows what results can be expected
from the different research efforts and how they can be used, as well as
what kind of research directions is absent. The results of this survey point
out that the research predominantly consists of descriptions of various studies carried out to investigate the use of some mobile learning system/tool.
There are few papers that reflect upon the development practice and how to
improve it. A small number of the papers were classified as understanding
or evaluating mobile learning practices, and even fewer could be considered
in the category of basic research.
The investigation into mobile learning initiatives involving members the
Kaleidoscope network of excellence (Publication II) studies these issues from
different perspectives by using different data sources that together form a
unit of analysis. The insights gained from this cross analysis, using different methods and data-gathering techniques (i.e., interviews, questionnaires,
literature reviews), contributes with an increase understanding of the problems faced by project managers in mobile learning initiatives. This investigation further applies a risk assessment model (derived from information
systems development) to the mobile learning initiatives. The overall outcome indicates that the model can be applied, although experience gained
from using it, suggests that the way forward should be a model more suitable
to the field of mobile learning.
In order to better understand the initiatives and the development practice of mobile learning, several studies and surveys were conducted. These
studies contribute by helping to formulate the framework, i.e., the main
contribution of this work, but they also contribute as reflecting objects trying to understand mobile learning practices. Further, in Publication VI a
study is conducted which investigates the development of three quite different mobile learning initiatives in order to view how different stakeholders
are involved in this process. This is just one example of a cross-case study
done to better understand and utilize a number of data sources (i.e., the
triangulation of data sources).
52
6.2 Future Research Directions
Publications I and VII also contribute with lessons learned and practical
guidelines that researchers in mobile learning can learn from and reflect
upon in order to avoid pitfalls. These can be considered as intermediate
steps towards the establishment of the framework, both in development
and use.
The originating ideas describing the framework and its development, addressed in publications III, IV, and V, make a contribution in a number of
ways. Important concepts within the development practice of mobile learning were identified and connected to relevant theories (i.e., triangulation of
theory). This led to the discovery and definition of the notion of scalability
in terms of information systems development. Scalability generally refers
to the quality to accommodate an increasing number of factors. In the proposed framework, scalability is used to refer to the ability of an initiative to
progress from one stage to another. It also refers to the process of changing
the scope from one stage to the next, considering all the implications and
changes. This makes scalability a key factor in the framework.
Scalability is further linked to the sustainability of an initiative, which
can be expressed as having maximum scalability, i.e., the ability to scale to
the final stage. The concept of scalability and its relation to sustainability
is a contribution on its own. Another contribution of the framework is the
way it deals with mediation, i.e., equilibrium and focus. These two concepts
together make both risk assessment and stakeholder analysis implicit to the
framework.
The main contribution of this work presented in this thesis is the formulation of the framework, and how complex information systems development
theories are presented in a way suitable for researchers, and in turn practitioners, in mobile learning. However, the constellation of practitioners in
mobile learning is diverse, and for a framework to be useful to the community, it should be understandable and useful to a wide community of
systems developers, students, teachers, parents, school administrators, etc.
This requires a balance between theoretical concepts and practical considerations, such as the introduction and use of focus and equilibrium to guide
the development process.
6.2 Future Research Directions
The framework has been developed on the basis of the experience gained
by taking part in mobile learning initiatives, as well as the analysis of a
number of data sources. Furthermore, this knowledge and experiences have
been related to theories and methods coming from the field of information
systems development. As the main efforts of the thesis have been focused
on development a framework, it has not been possible yet to use it by
researchers and practitioners in the field of mobile learning.
A next step in the coming research would be to offer the framework and
its application to a number of initiatives in order to study how they use
53
6 Conclusions
it and what feedback they can offer. This should be followed by a more
extensive study where the effects of using the framework are investigated.
For example, one possible way could be by having several teams working
on similar efforts and having some of them using the framework and others
not. By closely observing the development processes of all the teams as well
as the outcomes, further insights into the applicability of the framework can
be gained.
The extended socio-technical model, presented in Chapter 5 and its personal system was created to capture how mobility help make the learning
more personal. It would be interesting to study how well this model describes other types of Technology-Enhanced Learning (TEL). These other
types might contain some of the aspects referred to as mobility in Chapter 2
and the model might thus prove suitable. This could be studied by reviewing other forms of TEL, such as pervasive or ubiquitous learning, and see
how well they fit the model. If there is a fit, the framework could be offered
to researchers within those fields.
The framework presented in this thesis could be offered to funding agencies to serve as an aid to help decide what to fund and when to evaluate.
The framework could, for example, serve as an indicator as to when the
evaluation of a funded mobile learning initiative should take place. The
division of the life-cycle of an initiative into four distinct stages could help
to decide which initiatives to continue to fund. An initiative that successful
reaches equilibrium at for example the Idea and Trial stages might prove
more sustainable and a better candidate for funding than one that has yet
to start the Idea stage.
Abstract
The current generation of undergraduate students are enthusiastic adopters of mobile technologies, and some of these technologies offers significant opportunities for broadening the times,
places and manner that students study and learn. One of these is
podcasting, which greatly eases distribution of content to portable
devices, giving the students opportunity for anytime, anywhere
learning. However, most educational podcasts do not take advantage of the potential of podcasting. In this paper we discuss the
issues surrounding the use of podcasting for higher education. We
report our experiences using podcasts to supplement two undergraduate Computer Science courses, and we provide tips for others
considering the use of podcasts in education.
7.1 Introduction
Podcasting is an asynchronous mode of distributing multimedia files – “podcasts” – over the Internet using syndication feeds, for playback on portable
devices and personal computers at the user’s convenience. It has much potential as a highly mobile learning tool, and yet almost all applications of
podcasting in university education fail to exploit the potential as they simply broadcast lectures (which are visual and even kinesthetic experiences)
as a podcast (which is primarily an audio experience). Some educational
podcasts compensate for this by including images, video, and/or web links.
However, we believe that there is value in creating audio-only podcasts that
supplement the lectures, so that mobile learning can occur in a “hands-free,
head-up” mobile situation to enable students to learn also during activities
such as commuting.
Despite the audio-only limitation of podcasting, it is attractive for education because it potentially enables students to increase the number of
hours of studying without necessarily having to remove something from
their schedule such as doing household chores, or exercising. And although
we advocate a supplement to lectures, the time required to prepare the extra material in such a podcast need not be too demanding on the lecturer.
There are some restrictions on what is possible with mobile podcast listening: the student is not likely to be able to take notes or look up references.
A related issue is that it can be difficult to elicit a response because the
user may not be in a position to use email or even send a SMS message at
the time they are listening, and are likely to forget to do it when they have
the opportunity later.
In this paper we review the ways that audio podcasting might be used
in an educational setting, particularly in a tertiary environment. We also
report the results of experimenting with podcasting as a supplement to
two first-year Computer Science courses with approximately 150 and 250
students respectively.
67
Publication I: Podcasts as a Supplement in Tertiary Education
7.2 Podcasting
The normal process for podcasting is that a content provider (podcaster)
will make the files available on the Internet via an RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feed, to which the audience subscribes using aggregation software
(a podcatcher). When a new podcast is published, it can be automatically
uploaded to their portable device and hence they can listen to it at their
convenience. Normally subscriptions are free, and there are no direct costs
for listening to podcasts. Podcasts are typically provided in a heavily compressed MP3 format and can be played on a wide variety of devices, many
of which are available inexpensively. Students are likely to already own
something suitable. In addition, any desktop computer with Internet access
is bound to be able to play a podcast, which means that owning a portable
player is not essential.
Podcasting is a relatively recent phenomenon; the first RSS audio feeds
appeared in July 2003 (Doyle, 2005) and by mid-2005 there were approximately 10,000 different podcasts available on a wide range of topics. In June
2005 Apple added podcasting to their free “iTunes” program, and this provided a surge of interest – within two days Apple announced that a million
podcast subscriptions had been made. In December 2005 the editors of the
New Oxford American Dictionary announced “podcasting” to be the word
of the year and it appeared in the dictionary in 2006. Many podcasts have
irregular and/or very limited followings, but some have hundreds of thousands of downloads of each episode. Their content and frequency is diverse,
from hourly 3-minute newscasts, through daily 20 minute commentaries,
to weekly one-hour in-depth discussions. Free software is also available for
podcast creation, and there is also a lot of material on the Internet (including in podcasts) explaining how to make your own podcast. For users
with an Internet connection, a desktop computer with a soundcard, and a
relatively inexpensive microphone, the main additional cost to produce a
podcast will be a relatively small fee required to have the files hosted on a
server with a plan designed for the large number of downloads that podcasts
can get, such as “Liberated Syndication” (http://libsyn.com).
7.3 Using Podcasts in Education
A key benefit of podcasting is that it enables students to listen to course
related material while they are engaged in other activities. In the past a
highly motivated student might have used such time for revision of their
lecture notes, or reading literature references, but the use of digital media
players provides a level of portability and ease of file transfer that has not
previously been feasible. Also, the use of a feed such as RSS coupled with
an aggregator such as iTunes means that the material can be pushed onto
the student’s portable device. By having files pushed like this, users are
more likely to listen to them because they need not remember to carry out
an explicit download.
68
7.4 Podcasts at Other Institutions
The medium does have disadvantages, such as the lack of visual content,
the difficulty of taking notes, and the divided attention of the listener between environmental distractions and the material on the podcast. Also,
the material will be of most benefit to auditory learners, and does not appeal to all students. Despite these limitations, there are many opportunities
for using podcasts as a supplement while giving a course. You can use them
to give out news and updates, answering questions sent in (for example
by email), and/or give general feedback to students. Another possibility
would be to highlight the key points you stated in class and have extended
discussion about them, and/or conducting interviews with external people
adding or reinforcing the material addressed. Podcasts is also a way of
providing hands-free instructions to students conducting laboratory work
or using different computer programs. In addition we can imagine letting
students do project reports using podcast as they develop good oral skills
and share their experience with the others. In the wider educational setting
podcasting could be used for recruiting and marketing, recording meetings
and conference talks, and broadcasting for specific groups such as alumni,
sports teams, or cultural groups.
Despite this rich range of potential applications, currently the most common approach to podcasting at universities is to provide the students with
the traditional lectures as a podcast. This does have some value, giving
them a second, or first if they missed it, chance to listen to it, which is
particularly appreciated by students whose first language is not English. In
many cases it also means that people outside the university community can
benefit from having access to the lectures. However, this does not represent
a major advantage over existing lecture recording systems that publish the
audio or even video on the web.
7.4 Podcasts at Other Institutions
A number of institutions have started to offer podcasts. Duke University’s
“Duke Digital Initiative” was one of the first institutional experiments with
ubiquitous portable audio devices, when in August 2004 all of the first-year
students were given a 20G iPod to use as a learning tool (Duke University, 2005). The intention was to facilitate innovative use of technology on
Campus. Applications that emerged included course content dissemination,
classroom recordings, field recording, study support and, file storage and
transfer. The students found the iPods useful for study support by using
them for repeated listening, audio books, going over rehearsals (drama and
music), and vocabulary lists. However, there were relatively few Podcasts
(three podcasts were reported after the first year), and it appears that the
major educational use was more student-driven: 60% of students reported
using their iPod for recording material, and 28% for music and hard drive
storage. A total of 75% reported using it to support their learning.
A number of universities have started making some of their lectures avail69
Publication I: Podcasts as a Supplement in Tertiary Education
able to the general public through podcasting. For example, Harvard is
into the second year of podcasting their course “Computer Science E-1,
Understanding Computers and the Internet” (http://www.fas.harvard.
edu/~cscie1/), and it has many followers – it has appeared in iTunes’
top 100 Podcasts. Berkley University has among 30 faculty members who
have agreed to clip on a microphone in class so that their courses’ audio
can be recorded and then posted online (http://itunes.berkeley.edu/).
Princeton University’s University Channel (http://uc.princeton.edu) let
different universities contribute recordings of lectures, seminars, panels and
interviews to a virtual pool of academic content under their own name.
The public podcasts of lectures allow anyone to sit in (“audit”) a course,
albeit without the full student experience. Access to these lectures in a
mobile environment is valuable for the casual listener, and particularly for
other educators who can pick up pedagogical ideas by listening to another
teacher at work. This open-source ethos is to be applauded, and reinforces
the idea that institutions should control qualifications, not the knowledge
itself. It can also improve the quality of the education since the teacher is
exposing their teaching to such a wide audience, increasing the opportunity
for feedback.
University of Southern California had two 2006 spring courses with lecture
podcasts being evaluated and according to Wolff (2006) the outcome was
positive in both cases. However the reasons differed as one course had a large
number of students for whom English is a second language who listened to
the whole lectures again, while the participants of the other course valued
having the recording to replay specific explanations to understand difficult
material.
From an online survey for the podcast pilot in 2005 at University of Washington, Lane (2006) reported that 70% of the students found that podcasts
supported their learning and to be helpful when preparing for homework
and exams. The response rate was low, 41 out of 148 enrolled students
completed the voluntary survey, but can indicate the perceived value of
podcasts. Interestingly, 81% of students used a desktop computer rather
than a portable player to listen to their podcasts. It appears that when
listening to a lecture podcast, it is valuable to sit at a desk and use notes
and handouts, in which case a desktop computer provides a better interface
for listening to audio than a portable device. This reinforces our contention
that simply podcasting lectures does not take full advantage of the potential
of podcasts to facilitate mobile learning, and for this application learning
may be better facilitated by using tools such as the Audio Notebook (Stifelman et al., 2001) and AudioGraph (Jesshope, 1999), which provide a richer
capture of the lecture.
Furthermore, making lectures available in a flexible manner can potentially inhibit learning. Students can postpone listening to lecture material indefinitely. In an earlier experiment with video-recorded lectures, we
observed exactly this behaviour: once the video-lectures were made available, attendance at lectures dwindled because the students could catch up
70
7.5 Podcasting Experiment
through the video at any time, but they never realised their intention to
do so (Bell et al., 2001). This is not likely to be a problem for motivated
students (e.g., for mature students and/or professional courses which could
benefit greatly from this mode of getting lecture material), but for less
mature students we suggest structuring curriculum delivery in a way that
encourages them to keep up with the class schedule.
7.5 Podcasting Experiment
To evaluate the potential of podcasts as supplementing lectures, we ran a
podcasting experiment for two first-year Computer Science courses, COSC122 (“Algorithms”) and COSC110 (“Working in a digital world”), at the
University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand. Approximately 150
and 250 students were enrolled in the courses respectively. We released
weekly podcasts that supplemented the lectures rather than record them in
their entirety. We did, however, also provide three recorded lectures for each
course, without announcing our intention to do so, to see whether students
would take the opportunity to review the material.
At the start of the COSC110 we surveyed students to determine what sort
of access they had to digital audio players, and if they had any experience
with podcasts. We found that 64% of the students had a portable device,
and that 82% regularly listen to audio on a computer. Those that had
portable devices estimated that they spent an average of 7.6 hours per
week listening to them, and 16% reported listening to them for 10 or more
hours per week. The most popular situation for listening to them was while
walking (33%), but other activities are popular too, including on the bus
and in the car (21% each), while exercising (15%) and on a bike (10%). Only
13% of the students had listened to a podcast before, and only 3 students
in the class reported listening to podcasts daily. This is likely a reflection
of the lack of adoption of podcasting in New Zealand due to relatively high
charges for Internet use. Despite the lack of experience with podcasts, 87%
of the students reported that they intended to listen to the first podcast.
The initial survey also asked students to report their level of interest
(5-point Likert scale from 1 for not interested to 5 for very interested) for
three types of material in the podcast. The number of students showing an
interest level or 4 or 5 (i.e. more than neutral) was 50% for recordings of lectures, 72% for summaries and extra information, and 65% for topical issues
relating to the course, indicating a student preference for the supplements,
although the inevitable demand for re-runs of lectures.
Both courses were given weekly podcasts. The COSC122 podcasts were
about 20 minutes long, with one presenter, while the COSC110 podcasts
used two presenters, and ranged from 15 minutes to almost one hour. The
entire fourth podcast of COSC122 is accessible as an example at http://
www.cosc.canterbury.ac.nz/tim.bell/podcastExample.mp3. The COSC110 podcast was made available to the public through http://uccsse.
71
Publication I: Podcasts as a Supplement in Tertiary Education
libsyn.com/. For both podcasts, the general format was to review the
material from the past week, discuss topics coming up later in the course,
remind students about any deadlines and provide discussion about current
topics, especially if they related to current events. Each COSC122 podcast
had a competition with a small prize to encourage students to email in their
comments. In one of the COSC122 podcasts a section of the course text
book was read aloud (with some additional commentary).
The podcasts were recorded using digital audio editing software, with a
studio microphone. Off-site interviews were recorded with a portable digital audio recorder, although there are many other devices including mobile
phones, laptops and digital cameras that could be used for this. A theme
tune was used to add interest, provide context, and give personality to the
podcast. It was also useful for covering background noises such as pages
being shuffled. Interviews were edited into the podcast – in fact, many
of the COSC110 interviews were recorded as one of the authors traveled
around the world, which demonstrated truly mobile teaching with several
interviews recorded on a conference on a ship on the Yangtze river, as well
as commentaries recorded while waiting at airports. Although intricate
editing is possible with the software we were using, the podcast genre typically has a “live” style, with minor glitches left in the recording. Recording
in one take makes creating the podcast much less effort, and gives a personal and dynamic feel to the episode. Podcast recording software such as
“Castblaster” and “PodProducer” assume this one-take mode of operation,
whereas editing systems such as “Audacity” and “Garageband” encourage
the podcaster to edit the content. We found that interviewees were often
a little nervous as it was a new experience, and in these cases the offer to
edit out any hiccups was greatly appreciated. Generally very little editing
was needed once the interview got underway.
For COSC122 we were able to compare actual downloads with the students’ expectations in their survey. Unfortunately in the first week of term a
major server crash occurred that made access to the podcasts very difficult
for students. However, in the second week when the system was working
properly, the second podcast was downloaded 69 times, which compares
favourably to the 87 students who said they intended to download it, although it represents just under a half of the class, and we were unable to
count unique downloads. The three lectures were downloaded 37, 33 and
33 times each, which is under half the download counts for the first five
podcasts (50, 76, 35 (missing data in the logs), 79 and 73).
The COSC110 podcast was made available to the outside world through
iTunes, and the number of downloads often exceeded the number of students in the class. Feedback from outside listeners included one ex-student
who was using the podcast to catch up with developments since taking the
course.
Feedback and Summary Questionnaire: We were keen to receive feedback
from the students to gauge the podcasts’ effectiveness and to help us tailor
future podcasts to better suit their needs and desires. We tried a variety of
72
7.5 Podcasting Experiment
techniques to encourage feedback, including a draw for free coffee for students who emailed or text-messaged us to say they had listened. Response
rates to the draw were very low, with only two to five responses per week,
but low response rates are a known phenomenon for podcasts, even when
they are heavily downloaded. One explanation for the low response rates
is that listeners are often occupied with other activities (such as walking,
cycling and driving) making it inconvenient to respond on impulse. The few
responses we did receive were generally positive. Giving answers to student
questions in the podcast was well received, and the summaries and extra information seemed to be the most valuable. Reading from the text book drew
one unfavourable comment despite it representing a genuine time-saving for
students who intended to read the text anyway. Some students asked for
all lectures to be made available, although we chose not to for the reasons
given earlier. Some students worried about the cost of downloads, although
in fact we had set it up so that it would be free.
After five weeks of podcasting COSC122 (including the three sample
recorded lectures), we administered a questionnaire in a regular lecture to
gain insights into the extent of use of the podcasts, the students’ on-going
intentions, and their perceptions of the podcasts they had listened to. 56
completed surveys were returned — approximately 38% of the class. Of
those, 37 (66%) reported that they had not downloaded any of the podcasts. The most common reason given for not downloading the material
was that they “still plan to” (16), and that they had problems accessing
the podcasts from home (13). Four stated that they “were not interested”,
five stated that they forgot, and six stated they had “technical problems”.
This suggests that if we overcame technical problems and made it easier for
students to remember to download then the number who used the podcasts
could more than double, and the majority of the class would be listening to
podcasts. This is likely to be the case as the technology matures.
Nineteen participants (34% of responses) stated that they had downloaded some or all of the podcasts. Of the five podcasts, most people listened to all of the material, except for podcast 2, which had a higher ’switch
off’ rate. This is unsurprising as podcast 2 included the relatively long (8
minutes) reading from the text book; but it shows that students’ tolerance
for “dull” podcast material is relatively low.
We asked five questions regarding the problems that they had encountered with the podcasts, again rated on a five-point Likert scale from 1
(major problem) to 5 (no problem): remembering to download, remembering to listen, quality of audio, finding a device and getting distracted. Of
these, remembering to download was the biggest problem (mean 3.5, s.d.
1.5), followed by getting distracted (mean 3.7, s.d. 1.2) and remembering to
listen (mean 3.9, s.d. 1.0). Neither quality of the audio (mean 4.7, s.d. 0.6)
nor finding a device (mean 4.4, s.d. 1.2) appeared to be a major problem
for these respondents who had successfully accessed the recordings. The
relatively high problem rating for getting distracted is a concern, particularly because students may be listening to the lectures while carrying out
73
Publication I: Podcasts as a Supplement in Tertiary Education
activities such as cycling and driving.
The COSC110 class used a different format, with a 2-person discussion
which usually went for 30 to 60 minutes. Informal feedback from students
indicated that this is too long for many, and that the podcast should be
kept short and to the point.
It was clear from the feedback that there is a small but significant group of
students who have almost no interest in this mode of learning, but those that
regularly used the podcasts the feedback was extremely positive, including
comments such as “Great – keep it up!” and “Nice addition to study kit”.
7.6 Conclusion
These experiments with podcasting indicate that it can be a low-effort
and effective supplement, but not substitute, for traditional lecture-based
courses. The students who used our podcasts greatly appreciated them, and
many of those who had not yet accessed the recordings indicated that they
thought it was potentially useful and interesting, and that they intended to
access them “later”.
A number of suggestions for podcasts content are given earlier in the paper. In the light of our experience we offer the following tips for those considering using podcasts to supplement introductory undergraduate courses:
• Keep podcasts short and to the point – 15 minutes per week is probably
about right for most students unless the podcast is expected as part of
the contact time for the course.
• Use a system such as RSS to push the information out to students;
this is likely to result in a higher uptake than if they students have to
manually download the files.
• Be aggressive in overcoming technical problems at the start, such as
making sure files are easy to download both on-campus and at home.
• Include motivating material in the podcasts such as interviews and
topical news articles.
• Maintain a live feel to the podcasts, and inject personality. Recording
the podcast with minimal editing dramatically reduces the work for
the producer and creates a dynamic mood for the episode. Apart from
the initial overhead of setting up the recording system and background
music, the time taken to produce a podcast will not be much longer
than the podcast itself.
• Do not be surprised or concerned about low response-rates to requests
for feedback in the podcasts. This is a known phenomenon for the
podcast medium. Based on our experience, podcasts seem to be an
attractive tool to help engage students, build a class “culture”, and
disseminate the important and fascinating problems that the discipline
addresses.
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
If you are podcasting recordings of lectures, students are more likely to
be listening to them in a non-mobile situation because of the length and to
avoid the distractions of a mobile environment, in which case you should
consider posting other course materials online as most students will be at a
personal computer and can make use of links to other references.
We hope that we will see more podcasts that supplement courses rather
than just take audio content from lectures, as we believe that this adds
considerable value, and need not be onerous to produce. This could range
from a cognitively demanding podcast such as teaching a language, through
to lighter material such as interviews with practitioners that can be followed
despite the distractions present in a mobile environment, giving a good
return to the student for a relatively small investment of time and effort.
Publication II

Publication II
Thinking Ahead in Mobile
Learning Projects: A Survey on
Risk Assessment
Anna Wingkvist
V¨axj¨o University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden
Morgan Ericsson
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
This publication was included in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Perspectives on Business Information Research (BIR 2009), Kristianstad University College, Kristianstad, Sweden, 1–2 October 2009. Aidemark, J., Carlsson,
S., and Cronkvist, B. (eds.), ISBN: 978-91-633-5509-7, pp. 57–66.

Abstract
Mobile learning is an innovate and dynamic field of multidisciplinary research and development. This paper presents a
study of risk assessment in mobile learning. Interviews, a questionnaire, and several publications are used as means for data
collection. This is done to identify risks within mobile learning
projects in order to investigate how well these fit a risk assessment
model for socio-technical systems. The survey of mobile learning
projects show that the project managers are faced with an array of
potential risks. The risks are then classified according to a model
developed by Lyytinen et al., which is based on the influential
Leavitt’s Diamond. The research finds that the model is sufficient
to classify the risks experienced by mobile learning projects. It
does provide a good starting point and when used it can quickly
illustrate how the variables relates to each other. The complexity
concerning risk management is important for the mobile learning
community, and a model to proceed from might benefit the community greatly.
Keywords: mobile learning, project management, risk assessment, socio-technical system
8.1 Introduction
The prevalent understanding of mobile learning is that it is learning on
the move, often enabling the learner to take control over time and place,
making it more spontaneous and personal according to Kukulska-Hulme
and Traxler (2005). Naismith et al. (2004) suggest that using the time
when a person is mobile is a way to tap in to a resource maybe not optimal
used or used at all before. A learner do not have to be on the move per
se, just being without the need or ability to access static learning resources
(e.g., libraries, desktop computers, textbooks, etc.) is sufficient as criteria
to be called mobile learning, as stated by Sharples (2000). The uncontested
definition of mobile learning is ‘‘any sort of learning that happens when the
learner is not at a fixed, predetermined location, or learning that happens
when the learner takes advantage of learning opportunities offered by mobile
technologies”, from O’Malley et al. (2003).
As the current mobile and wireless technologies have reached a level of
maturity and ability to support a variety of learning activities, the amount
of projects within the field of mobile learning have steadily been on the rise.
These projects are faced with, and need to deal with an array of problems
to meet the challenges presented when populating such an innovative and
dynamic field. Mobile learning is by definition a multi-disciplinary field,
spanning across Computer Science, Educational Studies, Information Systems, Project Management, Software Engineering, etc. Along these lines
the outcome from these projects can be called mobile learning systems, and
81
Publication II: Thinking Ahead in Mobile Learning Projects
these should be labelled as socio-technical systems, i.e., open systems considering people and technology together and focusing on the interactions
between them.
These interactions are something the project managers in mobile learning
need to master in order to become the anticipated success they are expected
to be. J¨arvel¨a et al. (2007) remark that “only a few studies give detailed
arguments as to what are these new opportunities in terms of learning interactions and collaboration and what are the exact processes that mobile
tools can scaffold.” Hence, to this day, few of the mobile learning projects
resulted in actual learning aids that are in wide use, as observed by Keegan
(2005). It seems they are being fazed tackling issues along the way. These issues either affect the development, for example by making it more complex,
more costly or take longer time, or affect the outcome of the project in ways
that make it unsuitable for the intended learning purpose. For example, in
several projects the development has been affected by technical limitations,
when environmental impacts such as weather or vegetation made the tools
difficult or impossible to use, or ended up with technical solutions that do
not fit the intended organization’s infrastructure.
The unforeseen events encountered by mobile learning projects are in
essence the same as risks in information systems and software development.
Here, the term risk is used to refer to unsatisfactory outcomes, such as budget overruns, wrong functionality, poor quality, etc. (Boehm, 1991) and a
failure to obtain all or any of the benefits (McFarlan, 1981). Risk management deals with how to assess and control risks, and has been the focus
for much investigation. Various fields have contributed and presented several theoretical models and approaches to deal with risk management for
example in Information Systems and Software Engineering.
The research presented in this paper focus on risk assessment for mobile
learning projects. There is little research on the area within the field of
mobile learning, and the aim is to investigate how risk assessment in itself
for mobile learning projects could be improved. A number of projects are
studied in order to find the risks experienced. There is a reason for this.
The reason is to investigate if a risk assessment model for socio-technical
systems is suitable for mobile learning projects.
The rest of the paper is organized, following this introduction with Section 8.2, discussing risk assessment and the adherent social-technical model.
Section 8.3 describes how the empirical data was gathered, continued with
an analysis of the empirical data in Section 8.4, which is followed by a
discussion in Section 8.5. And Section 8.6 concludes the paper.
8.2 Background
Mobile learning as a research field is characterized by constant technological change and innovation. Naturally, researchers are one step behind with
theoretical development from the fact that they are first being practition82
8.2 Background
Structure
Task Technology
People
Figure 8.1: Leavitt’s Diamond.
ers. As practitioners, they learn by doing, rather than thinking behind the
desk or desktop. Therefore, risk assessment in the field of mobile learning
is currently presented as guidelines based on the trial-and-error conduct
and the emergent know-how from a practitioners point of view, for example
Vavoula et al. (2004). Risk management is a tough, practice-based problem area where the experiences of project managers are important and the
context is of essence. Traxler (2007) states that it must be recognized that
mobile learning is essentially personal, contextual, and situated; this means
it is ‘noisy’ and problematic area of research, and few projects are completed
to further implement and evaluate these experiences. This means that the
field of mobile learning should be moving from techno-centric to managerial
questions, and consequently it is of high interest how valuable insight can
be gained from investigating contemporary conduct on how risk, context,
and innovation interact.
Lyytinen et al. (1998) state that in order to control risk there is a need to
acknowledge the setting as socio-technical, and continue with presenting a
schematic devision based on Leavitt’s open system model of organizational
change to frame the potential risk areas involved. Leavitt (1965) views
organizations as systems consisting of four interacting variables, these being: Technology, Task, People (Actors), and Structure. The four variables
are highly interdependent, as indicated by the arrowheads between them,
depicted as the classical diamond shape in Figure 8.1. These arrows indicates a strong bond and that a change to one of them will affect, no matter
planned or unplanned, the others.
Change in itself is inevitable for any socio-technical system and the model
uses the concept of equilibrium to reason about the interactions between the
variables and its stability as a whole. If the state of a variable is incompatible
with one or more of the others, it will affect them and result in compensatory
or retaliatory action from the others, and hence shape the performance
of the entire system. The effects of an incompatible variable are called
variations in socio-technical theory, according to Mumford (2003). The
aspiration of any project manager is to identify and control such variations,
83
Publication II: Thinking Ahead in Mobile Learning Projects
maintaining the system equilibrium either by enforcing routine or planning
of problem-solving measures. Changes can cause variations, and variations
can in turn cause failures when not dealt with correctly. The variations
can be considered risks. So, there is a great need to understand the extent,
impact, and nature of these risks, as well as the potential insights and
solutions.
In the opinion of Lyytinen et al. (1998) aiding in the work behind risk
assessment, the conception of the four variables individually and their interaction with one another can help. The notion that these interactions
sometimes cause them to collide can also prove helpful. In light of this, the
variables can be considered the tectonic plates of risk assessment. The four
variables on their own form a good initial picture of the possible risks. However, several risks can exist within the interdependencies between the four
variables as well. Following is a description of the four variables and each
of the possible six combinations, provided together with examples related
to mobile learning projects. These are provided to illustrate the reasoning
and connection between the variables.
The first tectonic plate is Technology. It refers to direct problem-solving
inventions, which for example include methods to develop and evaluate,
as well as the methods used within the system. It also includes the actual
tools, such as the infrastructure platform used. In a mobile learning project,
Technology includes the mobile devices, the server hardware and software,
pedagogical theories, etc. Technology can be the source of considerable risk,
for example if it is non-standardized, unstable, or have functional limitations.
The second tectonic plate is Task. It is the production of goods and services, including the large numbers of different but operationally meaningful
subtasks that may exist in a complex organization. It describes the reason for the existence of the project, i.e., the main goals and purpose. This
is normally defined by deliverables and process features. In terms of mobile learning projects, the task is often a learning scenario, which describes
how the learning can be conducted using technical aids. Observed risks are
complexity, size, and ill-defined or unrealistic goals.
The third tectonic plate is Actors. It refers chiefly to people, but with
the qualification that acts executed by people at some time or place need
not remain exclusively in the human domain. In short it portraits the
stakeholders of a mobile learning project. Risks that are connected to actors
are for example false beliefs or wrong expectations, staff lacking in skill, and
unwilling users.
The fourth and last tectonic plate is Structure. It means systems of
communication, system of authority (or other roles), and system of work
flow. It includes both norm and behavior, i.e., roles, values, and actual
patterns of communication. In mobile learning projects, this can include
the structure and roles in learning, the authority of schools and government,
and similar issues. It also includes the development process. Risks involve
a lack of communication with, for example intended users or bad planning.
84
8.2 Background
The interaction between the four individual variables are also interesting
and continuing in turn with the crossing path of Technology and Task. This
focus on how technology fits with the task. Misfits between these two can
create considerable risks. Problems with for example too complex and sophisticated technology can increase the task complexity making it hard, if
not impossible, to perform. This type of usability testing should be identified at an early stage when these can be easily corrected, whereas changing
a product after deployment can be costly and not always feasible. Considering the mobile learning project as part of a socio-technical infrastructure
means to develop learning activities using the technology and that the technical system must be seen as part of those activities and not a separate
product.
Next, the junction of Technology and Actors zooms in on the relationship
between the technology and the people, for example problems associated
when attempts are made to introduce untested technologies or technology
that do not suit the users. For mobile learning, there exist a need to fine
tune the perception of and not get blinded by the innovations of new technologies and ways technology is being or can be used. Careful consideration
of pedagogical design, keeping the position of the learner in mind and embedding technology in a pedagogic surrounding is the key.
All while, the meeting point of Technology and Structure deals with the
interaction between technology and the organizational structure. Inappropriate technology can cause considerable disturbances and even be in conflict with authority and communication lines. Considering the organization
(and society) and technology as closely connected is advocated for mobile
learning. For example recognizing and even encouraging learning that takes
place outside of the classroom, the need for formal learning to intersect with
different modes of learning that take place through technologies in informal
settings outside the school is needed.
The intersection between Task and Actors puts attention on the actors
abilities relating to the task, for example their ability to specify, analyze, and
carry out the task. Risks here include actors attitude and understanding
of the task, for example the experience or disagreement of the purpose of
the task. This is evident in mobile learning, where most studies have either
provided evaluations in the form of attitude surveys and interviews, that
stating learners say they enjoy it, or observation based, where learners look
as if they are learning. These kind of results do little in terms of providing
evidence that learning has occurred, its features or durability. Although
surveys, interviews, and observations can illuminate the learning process,
more is advocated to manifest the fit.
The match of Task and Structure revolves around the fit between task
and the organizational arrangement. Misfit can cause risks, such as unbearable workloads, ethical dilemmas, and inadequate use. When introducing
technologies and services for mobile learning, there is a need to apply a comprehensive approach considering the individual, social, and organizational
aspects of technology adaption for the task of learning, and not purely focus
85
Publication II: Thinking Ahead in Mobile Learning Projects
on the technical features.
Lastly, the Actors and Structure coordination focus on the interaction
between people and the organizational constitution. A disarray in for example stakeholder behavior, incentives, and locations, towards the prevailing integrity could cause risks. In mobile learning this is illustrated by
the overwhelming nature of the social and cultural context in which new
technologies are trialed. This is leading to the importance of trying to fast
track the development so that the technology is used by real people in real
setting as quickly as possible, in order to be able to perform critical incident analysis. This can be for example done via reflective interviews with
stakeholders.
8.3 Method
This section presents the method and specifies how the data collection used
multiple means, offering the opportunity for triangulation of the same, as
specified by Robson (2002). Prior to data collection the research objective,
in the form of a research aim was proposed, and led to a focused approach
in getting to the unit of analysis (Yin, 2003). A number of questions were
thought out (information and experience related questions to project managers on their latest completed mobile learning project) and in March 2008,
phone interviews were conducted with three project managers as to survey
the problem area as such and in particular the questions. This was done
to get input on how the questions were perceived and answered, and to
construct a questionnaire from the insights gained. Next, the link to the
electronically posted questionnaire was sent out via e-mail in April 2008, to
all the 30 project managers specified on the Kaleidoscope homepage (Kaleidoscope, 2009) together with an introductory text specifying the reason for
it, who was asking, and that their participation would be much obliged.
They were given a three week window to complete the questionnaire.
Kaleidoscope is a European research network of excellence, consisting of
more than 1000 researchers from over 90 research centers. The aim of Kaleidoscope is to transform the quality and reach of the learning experience and
build a sound foundation for Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL). The
research conducted within the network is primarily based on experimental field studies and in turn providing theoretical contributions from these.
The choice of Kaleidoscope is a convenient one as it is an umbrella organization for mobile learning in Europe. It is also an appropriate choice to
use as to gain access to the unit of analysis via the first author’s association
to CeLeKT (Center for Knowledge and Learning Technologies) at V¨axj¨o
University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden, which is one of the contributing parts of the
Kaleidoscope network.
The choice of Kaleidoscope was made to gain insight from project managers in the field of mobile learning, representing a specific data set but still
with experiences from a range of diverse settings and hence views on risk
86
8.4 Analysis
assessment. The project managers were asked to select a recently finished
project they been in charge of and provide answers based on it in order to
minimize the problems associated with retrospective data collection. The
objective was to describe and give explanations of conduct that is not so
well understood in the sphere of mobile learning; the contemporary task
of handling risk. Out of the 30 asked, 15 project managers answered the
questionnaire, evidently making it a 50% answer rate. The questions are
presented in Appendix A, starting with identification specific, followed by
a mix of open and three option Likert scale (Agree, Agree to some extent,
and Do not agree) questions.
In the process to triangulate the data, the project managers were asked
in the questionnaire to specify publications related to the project that had
been either published or are forthcoming. It varied considerable how many
they listed, some provided none but in total 28 publications were given.
These are shown in alphabetical order in Appendix B, and assigned a number in ascending number sequence. Each publication was read carefully
(and multiple times) and marked where problems were mentioned. Several problems could be mentioned in one publication. In these publications
the issues encountered are presented often implicitly in the text, but by
even being addressed in the publications, the risks are present and relevant
enough to be of importance. The goal of using publications was to support
the answers given at the interviews and of the questionnaires with another
data set.
8.4 Analysis
This section presents an analysis of the questionnaire and the publications
listed in the questionnaire. First, the answers to the questionnaire are
presented and analyzed, then these answers are classified according to the
model presented in Section 8.2. Based on this, the publications are then
analyzed and problems found are categorized according to the same model.
This way, the risks experienced can be tied to actual instances and problems,
together with indications of how problematic these were. The analysis will
focus on the questions regarding risks related to mobile learning, not the
identification questions, such as name, project name, budget, etc. (i.e.,
questions 1 to 7).
The questionnaire (cf. Appendix A) has two categories of questions. The
majority of the questions use a Likert scale with three options – I agree,
I agree to some extent, and I do not agree. The answers to these are
summarized in Table 8.1. The rest of the questions are open (free text).
Although, some do provide a set of elective options to choose from (listed
within brackets) for inspiration. The free answers are adressed in connection
to the question posed and often in quotation marks. A publication is referred
to by the symbol # and its number (cf. Appendix B). Some direct quotes
are given as examples from the publications to highlight the problem area.
87
Publication II: Thinking Ahead in Mobile Learning Projects
Question Agree Agree to
some extent
Do not
agree
8 75% 25% 0%
9 18.5% 44% 37.5%
10 37.5% 44% 18.5%
11 37.5% 50% 12.5%
12 13% 27% 60%
14 62.5% 37.5% 0%
15 56% 44% 0%
17 37.5 44% 18.5%
19 37.5% 37.5% 25%
20 40% 53% 7%
21 20% 0% 80%
24 53% 40% 7%
Table 8.1: Summary of the Answers in % to the Likert Scale Questions.
Questions 8 and 10 focus on the learners and their interactions with the
mobile devices, and the answers to these questions show that the perception
of the learners were that they were willing to participate in the learning
activities (100%), and a majority of them did not experience any major
difficulties using the technology (81.5%). To further illuminate these issues,
from #9, it can be noted that “students pointed out that listening to the
lecturer, writing lecture notes and using the mobile learning tool at the same
time, were too much to handle. Therefore, aspects related to cogitative
load need to be recognized.” #3 made the observation that “listening to
a lecture, following a displayed presentation, making notes and exchanging
them with colleagues all at the same time is challenging even for the most
skillful students.”
Further, in #13, “student ownership and 24/7 access to a handheld device
is central to the approach”, and further along this line “where students had
constant use of the mobile devises, there was evidence of a growing sense of
autonomy, as students created their own uses to meet personal purposes”,
addressed in #7. From #22, the need to “ensure security and privacy for
the users” is perceived and in #4 “users can switch to private mode (invisible) but still can utilize the system resources”, while in #23, the “access
to the webspace is password protected, and the content published by the
students is moderated to ensure privacy protection and appropriate use.”
#3 state that “technology is only a means to an end, a more productive,
active, engaged and motivating learning experience for the learner”, similar
to #6 where “ICT (Information & Communication Technology) is seen as
an enabler, rather than an end in itself.”
Question 11 shows that most project managers think that educators
agreed with and saw at least some benefits of the technology (37.5% agreed,
50% agree to some extent, while 12.5% disagree). This notion is approved
by #12 where “looking at the design related issues, the two teachers en88
8.4 Analysis
joyed being involved in the design of the activities as well as in the process
of creating new learning materials. They also experienced that this type
of ubiquitous learning activities may work out best when there is a proper
balance between pre and post activities combined with field trips.”
From Question 21, a majority of the projects, 80%, were initiated within
the project team. This is supported by #7 which state that “although the
project was not initiated by the teachers, they seemed to be pleased with the
technology.” In light of Question 12, 40% of the project managers agree that
there was a lack of operative support from the partners of the project. From
#20 it is expressed as “the service is costly and museum representatives have
expressed concerns about the running costs of the service, including staff
time, and resources.”
From Question 9, it can be noted that 62.5% state that there was some
difficulty in communicating with key partners. The complexity behind this
is shown in #24 where “the stakeholders included the funding body, the
development team, teachers, LEA (Local Education Authority) representatives, and museum curators and educational experts.” Moreover, this
complexity is recognized in #27 “for effective deployment of mobile devices
in teaching and learning support there needs to be recognition of PDAs
and smartphones as part of the ’whole’ ICT system within an institution”
and in #22 where they acknowledge the need to “provide training and ongoing technical support to the teachers to enable them to use the mobile
technologies to enhance current and enable new learning activities.”
In regard to Questions 19 and 17, 75% agree that the settings where the
project took place were more complex than expected, and 81.5% agree that
the goals of the project changed as the project progressed. This contingency
is clearly visible in #16 where “results also suggest that in higher education,
the challenge is on designing for social technologies that allow for bridging
different pedagogic goals (control of learning) and ways of communication
between the different actors in the learning environment” and “these latest
aspects require more than designing just services to connect people and
content, but also creating new didactic sequences and educational activities
that connect formal and informal learning settings.”
From Questions 14 and 15, all project managers agree that the team
had the necessary knowledge to complete the goals and that there was a
clear division of responsibility within the team. In contrast to the answers,
it is stated by #6 that a team should consist of “educators, educational
researchers, educational psychologists, designers, and technologists”, and
this continue in #22 where the need to “assign or assume necessary roles
for initiating and supporting mobile learning - a combination of teachers,
technical experts i.e., multidisciplinary teams, and educational visionaries
is necessary to ensure that the resulting applications are appropriate and
effective in the schools context”, is noticed. In #24 the work appraisal
changed and “care is needed not only in designing the technology, but also
in designing the learning task that takes use of the technology... it had to
go beyond the technology to look at the learning experience as a whole.”
89
Publication II: Thinking Ahead in Mobile Learning Projects
Technology Task Actors Structure
Technology 10 24
Task 22 17 20
Actors 11 8 9, 14,15,16,
23
12
Structure 13 19,21
Table 8.2: Questions of the Questionnaire Related to the Risk Assessment
Model.
When asked to elaborate on the issues regarding for instance the partner
organizations (Question 13) one project manager states that “Schools were
very used on a way of doing things – it was difficult for the teachers to introduce new technologies.” The same project manager also cites the school
culture of mobile phone bans and locked down networks as a problem. Another project manager points out the importance of recruiting teachers to
the team rather than administrators, and the value of co-design. This is
corroborated in #6, stating that there exists a “realization of the importance of technology but inability to incorporate this due to lack of training,
adequate infrastructure, and integration with the current curriculum.” Further, in #25 “a significant problem facing MyArtSpace for wider adoption
was the additional load placed on the school and teachers.”
In Question 16 the project managers were asked what advice they can
offer to others, and a majority of the answers relate to project organization, i.e., clear goals for outputs, good documentation, communication and
information flow, as well as the importance of supporting partners. One
project manager gave the comment: “we could not claim from the teachers to get involved 100% when they did not get specific financial support
to participate in the project.” Another comment was to “prototype early
on so that the stakeholder understand what you are trying to accomplish.”
This is also addressed in #25 where a museum staff member is quoted “We
would like to have continued with the service but it is not financially viable
for us within our current budgets. We would only consider continuing with
MyArtSpace if it could be funded again.”
Evaluation was the topic of Question 20 and 93% of the project managers agree that it was difficult to assess the learning outcome. In light of
this #8 points out that “it has also become evident that successful collaboration is not a spontaneous phenomenon, but structuring and regulating
socially shared learning process is needed.” “Furthermore, the use of the
mobile lecture interaction tool supported students feelings of belonging to
a group” as pointed out in #9. From #11 it is also stated that “the task of
designing effective computer support along with appropriate pedagogy and
social practices is more complex than imagined.”
In regard to Question 22, over 60% of the project managers state that
usability was the focus of the evaluation. Almost all of the evaluations were
done by the project team – only one project manager says that outside
90
8.5 Discussion
experts were used. However, many of the project managers claim that the
team had access to evaluation experts within the team.
When asked which aspects hindered the running of the project (Question
25), the most common reasons were: limited time (53%), technical issues
(41%), and limited budget (35%), while stating access to educators or an
unstable setting were 17.5% each. Additionally, due #13 and #22, it can
be seen that the “future success of mobile learning in school settings will
depend on the preparedness of teachers to adopt mobile technologies in
the classroom,” and “consider the use of mobile technologies to support
collaborative and group learning, while also discover and adopt suitable
applications to match the needs of a specific classroom and map directly to
curriculum needs.”
The questions of the questionnaire focus on which risks the project managers experienced, and Table 8.2 relates these questions to the risk assessment model discussed in Section 8.2. A majority of the risks relate to the
variables of Actors or Structure.
Based on the results of the questionnaire, the given publications were read
and then analyzed. Risks and problems mentioned were classified according
to the risk assessment model and the result is presented in Table 8.3. When
analyzing the risks experienced in the publications, the picture is enhanced
and complements the one presented by the questionnaire. Technology risks
are prevalent as are risks in the relations between the other three variables.
On the other hand, the risks that were the most prevalent in the questionnaire, i.e., the ones relating to Structure are less common in the publications.
The most common risk categories are Technology and Task-Actors. Of the
28 publications analyzed, 10 (36%) fall into each of these. These two are
followed by Task with 25%, and Actors-Technology, Actors-Task, and Actors at 18% each. Actor-Structure risks are only experienced by 4% of the
publications.
8.5 Discussion
From the risk assessment model suggested by Lyytinen et al. (1998), which
is based on the seminal work on organizational change by Leavitt (1965), an
analysis of the gathered data was made in Section 8.4. The data consisted
of a questionnaire, especially targeted for project managers in the field of
mobile learning, and their corresponding publications. The given answers
were classified as were the risks pointed out in the publications. The model
could capture risks extracted from the questionnaire and publications. This
shows that the model is expressive enough to use for mobile learning, and
suggests that it could be used to identify risks. It can also be used to analyze
risks and classify these after the fact.
The idea to have not only the four main variables; Technology, Task,
Actors, and Structure – the tectonic plates of the risk assessment – but
also the interactions between them proved powerful. A project manager
91
Publication II: Thinking Ahead in Mobile Learning Projects
Technology Task Actors Structure
Technology #1 #4 #13
#14 #17
#18 #20
#22 #26
#28
#10 #17
#25
#4 #7 #22
#23
#22
Task #18 #21
#24
#3 #4 #9
#20 #21
#26 #28
#8 #9 #12
#13 #16
#17 #20
#22 #23
#25
#10 #11
Actors #6 #7 #13
#27 #28
#8 #16
#20 #22
#25
#4 #6 #20
#22 #24
#22
Structure #5 #26
#27 #28
#19 #25 #6 #22 #2 #20
#22
Table 8.3: The Risks Addressed by the Publications and Their Numbers.
analyzing the potential risks cannot consider Technology alone and then
move on, but must also consider Technology and its interactions with Task,
Actors, and Structure. The analysis of the publications shows that many
risks were found in the interactions between the four main variables.
However, generally the power of a model is closely related to its complexity – the more complex it is, often the less functional it is as a tool to use.
This turned out to be true for the risk assessment model. Finding and classifying risks related to the main variables turned out to be quite demanding,
mainly because a risk seldom relate to a single variable. The more intricate
risks often quickly relate to all the variables and put stress on the implications of these interactions. For example, Hartnell-Young (2007) discusses
that the use of mobile devices blurs the time and space for learning and has
both positive and negative implications, e.g., parents could engage in virtually attending their children’s away weekend with their class but if one of
the goals of the experience is for students to practice independence it can be
contradictory in terms. This could lead to greater control and surveillance
of the students, meaning the school communities need to make appropriate
and sensible decisions about such issues. This example clearly manifest how
Technology (i.e., mobile device) points to the Task (i.e., learning goal), then
Actors (i.e., parents), and finally Structure (i.e., policy).
Given the complexity of risk assessment, several lists of competencies for
proper assessments and common risks have been published within Information Systems and Software Engineering, to help project managers to at
least consider the most desired capabilities and the most previously noted
risks for systems design in general. For example, Mumford (2000) lists
the capabilities needed, specifying knowledge, resources, psychological, organizational, and ethical, while Boehm (1991) presents the top ten risks
92
8.6 Conclusion
of software development and cites “Personnel shortfalls”, and “Unrealistic
schedules and budgets” as the top risks. Many of the qualities and risks discussed by Mumford and Boehm are still valid for mobile learning, however
there is also need for a set of domain-specific ones.
8.6 Conclusion
This paper presents a study on risk assessment in mobile learning in order
to better understand what risks there are and how a model as an underlying
construct can help project mangers to identify them. Hence, a questionnaire
and a number of publications were analyzed with respect to risks. These
risks were classified according to a risk assessment model for socio-technical
systems, suggested by Lyytinen et al., on the basis of Leavitt’s diamond
structure on organizational change considering four variables: Technology,
Actors, Task, and Structure.
The model proved to be useful but demanding, and not ideally suited
for mobile learning projects. The complexity stem from that the model
regard interaction between the variables as discrete, which often leads to
cyclic dependancies. This conceptual roundabout is very valuable on a
meta level, but at the same time difficult to connect to use in practice.
Another issue with the model is that the names given to the variables are
too general, making them hard to relate to, and not directly suited for the
multi-disciplinary project managers and teams populating mobile learning
projects. So, to improve the current situation based on the findings of this
research, the model should be simplified with respect to the interactions.
Moreover, it should be adjusted to mobile learning by a slight redefining of
the four variables and offer a distinct priority order. This could then serve
as a help for project managers and their teams in mobile learning when
dealing with the development process as such.
Acknowledgments
The authors like to take this opportunity to thank fellow colleagues Jesper
Andersson, Welf L¨owe, Marcelo Milrad, Anita Mirijamdotter, and Thomas
Panas for their comments on the research leading up to this publication.
We also want to extend our gratitude towards Mike Sharples, University of
Nottingham, for encouraging and practical feedback on the questions when
the questionnaire was under construction and later sent out.
93
Abstract
Understanding research initiatives in the field of mobile learning involves dealing with complexity. It is important to gather
knowledge on how to nurse these attempts. To develop ideas and
reach wide deployment of novel mobile learning is of great value.
In this paper there is a discussion of the factors that describe
attributes of mobile learning research initiatives and an investigation of whether these are sustainable or not, and what this means.
Sustainability for mobile learning initiatives is essential for the
wide acceptance from both public and academia. The paper also
addresses scalability of mobile learning research initiatives. Scalability is a term used to describe how well something can grow
to suit an increasing complexity, and is addressed as a possibility to reflect on good ideas. Scalability is important in order to
reach sustainability. Finally, this paper introduces a model that
illustrates the evolutionary life cycle of a mobile learning research
initiative. The model presents four evolution stages and these are:
Idea, Experiment, Project, and Release.
Keywords: evolutionary life cycle model, mobile learning, reflection, research initiatives, scalability, sustainability
9.1 Introduction
Mobile learning has grown from a minor research interest to a set of significant activities in schools, workplaces, museums, cities and rural areas
around the world as explicitly addressed by Sharples et al. (2008). The
phrase mobile learning is used according to Naismith et al. (2004), who define it as mobile technology that supports learning across locations, or in
reverse wording, that takes advantage of learning opportunities offered by
portable technologies. Only a few research attempts that introduced mobile
learning are ever deployed as learning aids that are in wide use (Keegan,
2005). This can be seen as a lack of sustainability(Zuga et al., 2006). The
problem of sustainability when new mobile learning is introduced can in
many cases be traced to bad assumptions regarding the entire situation and
it can also be a hostile or at least an unwilling environment. These factors
can make an attempt to introduce mobile learning unfeasible and hence
unsustainable, since the research initiative did not comprehend well enough
the setting that it is part of.
A typical mobile learning research initiative often starts as a technology
oriented activity according to Ting (2005). This is understandable, since
technology often is a limiting factor in what is perceived as possible. But
moving the focus from technology to users will open up a completely new
world with many more factors to consider. This process will continue as
the focus is extended to cover the entire situation. Laitinen et al. (2000)
refer to this process as “scaling the situation”. The notion of scaling the
103
Publication III: Addressing Sustainability for Research Initiatives in Mobile Learning
situation is modeled as the change from one evolutionary stage to another
in the evolutionary life cycle presented in this paper. In comparison, Boehm
(1988) describes an evolutionary development process for software. A mobile
learning research initiative that can complete this change successfully is
considered scalable from one evolutionary stage to the other. If it proves
scalable to the final stage of the evolutionary life cycle it is considered
sustainable.
The evolutionary life cycle combined with the notions of scalability and
sustainability provides a thinking tool for practitioners and researches in
the field of mobile learning and e-learning in general, and helps to reason
about how the complexity of the system they are developing changes with
evolution. The goal of this thinking aid is to increase the number of mobile learning research attempts that turn into learning aids that are in wide
use and in turn increase quality, by providing a model that can be used to
reflect upon and discuss the scaling process of the initiative. This paper introduces a model of an evolutionary life cycle describing the stages a mobile
learning research initiative goes trough. Evolutionary development methodologies (Boehm, 1988) have been suggested for e-learning, for example by
Hadjerroiut (2006). Wingkvist (2008) analyzed a Podcast initiative (Bell
et al., 2007) and showed how this mobile learning research initiative followed
an evolutionary life cycle. This paper further introduces and illustrates the
concept of scalability of a mobile learning research initiative.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Background to problem area
is discussed in Section 9.2. Section 9.3 presents a model of an evolutionary
life cycle for mobile learning research initiatives and Section 9.4 introduces
scalability. Section 9.5 describes how scalability and sustainability are linked
and in Section 9.6 the related results and research are presented. Finally,
Section 9.7 concludes the paper and presents future directions.
9.2 Background
The interest in mobile learning has increased tremendously during the last
decade.Taylor et al. (2006) acknowledge the rapid growth in research endeavors, aiming to develop and deploy mobile technologies to support learning. The information technologies finally have reached a level of maturity
and ability where it is possible to support these learning activities. The
emergent technologies include multimedia-equipped mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and pen tablet computers. In line with this
progress, the phrase lifelong learning is prevalent. The emphasis on supporting the learner, in collaboration with peers and lectures, both within
and outside the classroom, is evident. (Naismith et al., 2004) state that the
challenge will be to discover how to use mobile technologies to transform
learning into everyday life seamlessly. Traxler and Kukulska-Hulme (2005)
reflect critically upon the quality of mobile learning research initiatives and
conclude that, to date, few studies have been grounded in sound theory.
104
9.3 An Evolutionary Life Cycle Model for a Mobile Learning Research Initiative
Project
Release
Experiment
Idea
Figure 9.1: The Evolution of a Mobile Learning Initiative
In order to do this, a more reflective stance is needed. There is also a
need to consider mobile learning not only as technology driven but also as
a socio-technical system that recognize the interaction between technology
and people. However, when you move from a focus on the technology and
introduce users, you open up a completely new world with many more factors to consider. For example, the key stakeholders to a mobile learning
implementation are: the learners, the lecturing staff, the system designers
and the technical staff who implement it, and also device vendors, along
with the university administration that oversees the whole mobile learning
research initiative (Barker et al., 2005). The complexity is daunting and to
gather knowledge on how to nurse these attempts are of great importance.
9.3 An Evolutionary Life Cycle Model for a
Mobile Learning Research Initiative
The evolution happens in four stages: Idea, Experiment, Project, and Release. Depending on the outcome and scope, the evolution can be limited
to fewer stages, but the aim of a mobile learning research initiative should
always be a release in a “production” environment. Figure 9.1 describes
this evolution. The model of evolution says nothing about how long each
stage should take or how to move from one stage to the other. As by default, any mobile learning research initiative must evolve through the stages
described. If one or more are skipped, the changes it goes through will be
too large to handle. Every mobile learning research initiative starts with
an idea. The Idea generally is a vague notion of what, who, and how, i.e.,
how should some kind of learning be transformed to a mobile device and
who is the intended audience. The next step is to try out the idea in an
experimental setting. In order to evolve from the Idea to an Experiment,
a deeper understanding of the problem area is needed. In order to gain
this understanding, the Idea stage needs to be studied closely, and these
findings then is combined with an understanding of the intended target of
the experiment. For example, if there is an idea to teach math using games
on mobile phones, the Idea stage would mean understanding how to use
105
Publication III: Addressing Sustainability for Research Initiatives in Mobile Learning
mobile phones to implement games and how to translate the mathematical content to games. In order to move on to the Experiment stage, the
focus needs to be changed to which type of games actually would work,
for instance by looking closer at the learners, and then to implement these.
The major role of the Experiment stage is to determine if the idea works
or not in a controlled setting. Hence, the Experiment stage is carried out
with a small group and with much focus on figuring out what works and
what does not. Once this point is reached, where there is a convincing idea
and it works in practice, the next step is to move on to the Project stage.
This is done by taking what was learned, study how the environment will
change in the project, and combine them. The Project stage basically is a
more formalized and realistic extension of the Experiment stage. A project
is defined formally with stated prerequisites and a goal. There still is an
interest in understanding if the idea works or not, but now the move has
been made to a setting that is much closer to the intended setting. It also is
important to scale the number of participants and focus closer on how they
interact within the project. If continuing with the math education example,
a project would implement the game on mobile phones and distribute it to
a sample of the intended population. It will remain at the Project stage
until it achieves stability and all the needed learning has taken place.
Further, this learning is combined with an understanding of the environment in which the end product is intended to be released. The Release
stage occurs when the project ends and the novel learning aid is released
as a product. In the first two stages, the focus is on getting the technology
to work and dealing with the learning task or activity. Once these two are
on acceptable levels, the later stages focus on introducing producers and
consumers of the learning activity, as well as the organizations that for example, benefit and support the initiative. Consider the following example,
focusing on the technical aspects, in continuing in which students want to
learn mathematics by playing a game on their mobile phones. During the
Idea stage, a mockup was created, a pen and paper model of the game, to
refine the idea. When moving to the Experiment stage, a working prototype
of the game is needed, but there are few requirements on the software and
hardware other than that it should illustrate the concepts. It could, for
example, be run on a laptop rather than on a mobile phone. Once entering
the Project stage, people outside of the formal members of the project team
will be exposed to the game, so it now must run on some realistic device
that still can be controlled by the project, for example a particular mobile
phone. Moreover, the software now must be robust enough for the users to
be able to use it without problems. Another issue that may come up in this
stage is the need to customize the game, i.e., to add new content or new
math “problems”. In terms of software projects, the game has evolved into a
project with far more formal requirements, both on functionality and quality, compared to the prototype from the experiment. If it evolves to the last
stage, the software must run on the devices of the intended audience, i.e.,
any mobile phone that fulfills certain requirements. In a similar manner, it
106
9.4 The Property of Scalability
is no longer possible even to interact with all the users, which for example
means that the resources to deploy the software on the mobile phones, etc,
must be found. The quality of the software must be even higher, and the
math-game now has evolved from an Idea, to an Experiment, to a Project,
and a Release with requirements similar to that of a commercial product.
9.4 The Property of Scalability
The term scalability has its origin in computer science and Bondi (2000)
states that scalability is a desirable feature for a network, a system, or a
process. The concept reflects the ability of a system to accommodate an
increasing number of factors. A system that is not scalable cannot cope
with an increase in the factors that must be handled. At the same time,
the concept of scalability and the understanding of the factors that improve
or diminish it are vague and even subjective. While many system designers have an intuitive feeling for scalability, the determining factors are not
always obvious. This is transparent in reference to Davenport (2008), who
concludes that an information system cannot be analyzed independent of
the social and organizational arrangements that form its situation. Also,
Hirschheim (1985) regards information systems as social rather than technical. Following in this line of thought, mobile learning systems should not be
treated as technical systems with social consequences but rather as social
systems with a high degree of reliance on mobile technology.
A mobile learning research initiative often starts with an idea about how
to use mobile technology for a specific teaching goal. This idea can be formulated rather vaguely, for example “teach basic algebra using a mobile
phone game”. The idea decides a technological platform, an intended audience and an intended setting. Each of these is, when fully explored, quite
complex and interdependent. The development of a new mobile learning
aid, however, does not fully explore each of these complex issues at once.
They are all explored gradually during the development, as the idea is verified using one or more prototypes during one or more trials. During each
of these, the system is either refined or extended to better deal with complex issues gradually as the scope is extended. For example, the game to
teach basic algebra might at first be implemented on a traditional PC to
overcome the problems that development for various mobile platforms may
entail. Nonetheless, the PC prototype is still useful to investigate a number
of properties regarding the game and the teaching.
The process of gradually extending the scope is referred to as scaling. The
ability of the system to do this scaling is referred to as the scalability of
the system. This scalability is not an absolute property in the sense that a
system is either totally scalable or not scalable at all, nor is it desired to be.
The scalability of a system indicates how well it scales to suit certain needs.
For example, a game that teaches basic algebra might be scalable to suit
the entire population of 5th graders in a country, or a Podcast initiative can
107
Publication III: Addressing Sustainability for Research Initiatives in Mobile Learning
Figure 9.2: The Propagation of Effects due to Scaling
be scalable enough to support the needs of a number of different disciplines,
each with different teaching methods, for example introductory Japanese
and basic Computer Science. In the case of the development of a novel
mobile learning aid, scalability is not one-dimensional but rather multidimensional. For example, in the case of the algebra game on the mobile
phone, increasing the number of users will need additional mobile phones.
But that is not the only effect of increasing the number of users as an
infrastructure for distribution and updates needs to be added, i.e., technical
solutions, as well as a support infrastructure, e.g., equipment, facilities,
and training. In a related way, if the game scales only within a single
organization, for example a school, there might not be a need to support the
easy addition of new math problems or customizations of the game, but with
an increased number of users, this may be a required feature. This illustrates
that scaling the system will require change in multiple dimensions, and
that these changes propagate throughout the system and its environment.
Figure 9.2 shows this ripple effect.
In order to achieve sustainability, it is important to understand the changes
that happen from scaling the mobile learning research initiative, i.e., expanding the scope.
9.5 Achieving Sustainability
The term scalability reflects the ability of a system to accommodate an
increasing number of factors and by analyzing and understanding, which
these factors are, and how they influence the development, sustainability
can be achieved. As discussed in these concerns can in turn become new
concerns when the system is scaled further. In order to achieve sustainability, this process needs to be understood. In regard to the game to teach
algebra, assume it is running on a single mobile phone, supporting a single
student. Further assume everything is working perfectly. In order to scale
this to cover a class of students there are several questions that needs to be
answered in order to support this scaling. For example, will the game run
on existing mobile phones, or will the school supply devices to the class.
To run on existing devices will put more requirements on the game and
its development while using devices supplied by the school might limit the
acceptance of the game. These decisions will in turn affect the cost and
108
9.6 Related Work
Figure 9.3: Scaling According to Pre-set Specification
how money is spent (development vs. hardware purchases). The example
highlights two aspects of scalability. First, it is important that the system
that is to be scaled works according to some specification. If it does not,
it is hard to predict how scalability will affect the system. Second, it is
important to consider the impact of scalability before decisions are made
and carried out, since once the effects are noticed it may be hard or near
impossible to revert the change.
Consider “MyArtSpace” (Sharples et al., 2008), a mobile learning research initiative that aimed to bridge the preparation phase as well as the
follow-up work done in the classroom in connection with a museum visit. It
encouraged students to produce their own interpretations of a museum visit
through pictures, voice recordings, and digital notes they could share with
each other and the teacher/s. The initiative was a success on both technical
and educational levels but turned out to be unsustainable since scalability
was not fully investigated. In the end, the museum staff could not support
the technical equipment and the cost of the data traffic was not considered.
In order to take scalability into account, two things need to be considered.
First, it is important to keep the goal in mind and limit the scalability to
only work towards the goal and use pre-set specification, as depicted by the
sector in Figure 9.3.
Second, scalability should be considered as transitioning from one stable
state to another. In this paper, a stable system refers to a system that
works according to pre-set specification within its intended environment.
When a system is stable, consider the next stage, how the system would
scale to reach that stage and all the effects that happen due to the scaling.
Take these into account, and scale the system. Repeat this process until
the system has the required scope and functionality. In essence, a stable
system with the required scope and functionality is a sustainable system.
9.6 Related Work
Bondi (2000) says that scalability is the ability of a system to change to accommodate an increasing number of factors, for example a higher demand
in terms of more users. The term scalability has its origin from computer
science, and is considered a quality of, for example, a network, a system,
109
Publication III: Addressing Sustainability for Research Initiatives in Mobile Learning
or a process. If a system is not scalable, it cannot handle an increase of
factors. The understanding of scalability often is vague and subjective, but
a number of research efforts to define this notion have been carried out.
Laitinen et al. (2000), in addition to Weinstock and Goodenough (2006)
give a good overview of the underlying concepts and problems of scalability
in relation to system development. Stone (2004) investigates the notion of
scalability in relation to mobile learning, with reference to content delivery,
i.e., how can a teaching material be adapted automatically to fit a number
of possible platforms, both e-learning wise and mobile? For example, can
a video stream be reduced to pictures, and will the learning remain when
this scaling happens? In fact, Stone wants digital content to be able to
be reused across different technologies and network solutions, still ensuring
the pedagogic “value” of the material. Stone also wants to highlight the
issue of scaling up relatively small pilot projects, using the results gained as
input to new research initiatives in order to reach wider deployment. The
term sustainability is defined by Eckersley (1998) as the ability to continue
an activity or maintain a certain condition indefinitely. Black (2004), in
connotation to communities and societies, says that sustainability increasingly is seen as involving three interrelated dimensions: the economic, the
social, and the ecological. These dimensions all need to be considered when
thinking about sustainability in this context. When applied to systems in a
general sense it relies on Beer (1984), who states that a viable system needs
to be organized in a way to meet the demands of an ever-changing environment in order to survive. The Darwinian saying “survival of the fittest”,
from Darwin’s theory of natural selection, comes to mind, and a system
needs to be able to maintain a separate existence over time. Therefore, the
end product needs to be stand-alone to its creators and sustain a steady
state by itself.
Traxler and Leach (2006), and McFarlane et al. (2008) address both the
concepts of scalability and sustainability, in a similar way, at least intentionally, to how they are defined in this paper.
Traxler and Leach (2006) use the notions of scalability and sustainability
in a study of two mobile learning research initiatives in Africa. These are
called the “DEEP” project, which takes place in Egypt and Eastern Cape
Province of South Africa, and the “SEMA” project in Kenya. Both projects
are investigating the impact of portable technologies on teachers’ pedagogy
and practice. The two projects used different approaches in establishing the
communication platform. The “DEEP” project invested more resources on
the technical solution with PDAs and laptops while the “SEMA” project
utilized available technology (mobile phones) and standard for communication, i.e., GSM. The projects differed considerably in the number of users,
with the “DEEP” project involving 50 teachers while the “SEMA” project
addressed almost 100,000 teachers. Traxler and Leach find that both scalability and sustainability prove to be two key challenges, due to infrastructure, technology, equality, and policy.
McFarlane et al. (2008) bring the concepts of scalability and sustainability
110
9.7 Conclusion
to be addressed in relation to main policy issues. McFarlane et al. provide
the following points to be of relevance: support and funding, devices (specification, supply, services, and commercial interests), local authorities and
school, technical issues, and professional development of teachers, in this
respect. Further, McFarlane et al. stress that all are necessary to comprehend when scaling up the use of mobile technology in an educational
setting. They suggest that the main funding agencies should adopt a new
model that includes these points before giving out funds.
This model should thus focus on these issues and promote (re-) using
successful results from pilot projects, and teacher knowledge exchange, as
an input for new projects and potentially reach wider deployment, and hence
sustainability. This will in turn follow with more acknowledgment from the
public and also give the field of mobile learning the success stories it so
desperately needs to be accepted in the world of academia.
9.7 Conclusion
This paper discusses a model for an evolutionary life cycle to illustrate
how mobile learning research initiatives are carried out. In order to help
reason about the changes occurring when transitioning from one stage to
another during this development, the notions of scaling the system and
scalability are introduced. Scaling the system refers to how the initiative
grows from one stage to another. Scalability describes how well a system
change in relation to increasing demands put on it. This is different when
dealing with a mobile learning research initiative compared to developing
software since mobile learning is to be viewed from a socio-technical point
and the actual change may be in the interaction between people (within
the initiative) rather than the corresponding software. A mobile learning
research initiative that is scalable to the final stage of the evolutionary life
cycle, namely the release stage, is considered sustainable.
The aim of this paper is to help increase the reflection upon, and the understanding of the evolution and change during the development of mobile
learning research initiatives. By providing a model that illustrates scalability in stages, the quality of the development process could be increased. The
evolutionary life cycle model and the notion of scalability as presented in
this paper is not the only way for mobile learning to achieve sustainability.
There exist several other frameworks and models to aid the development.
However, many models and frameworks are not focused on evolutionary
development, something that seems very natural to e-learning and mobile
learning. Also, in some cases where evolutionary development is the focus, the process is not adapted for socio-technical systems, again something
that is very natural to learning. The model presented in this paper provides
an intuitive entry to reason about scalability and change in socio-technical
systems that follow an evolutionary development.
An important future task is to see if the notion of scalability and the use
111
BIBLIOGRAPHY
of it combined with the evolutionary life cycle are intuitive enough to be
used during the development of future mobile learning research initiatives.
A first task would be to determine the usefulness to the development team.
If proven useful, a second task would be to see if the life cycle increases
reflection and in turn how that reflection would change the end product.
Only then can the quality of the product and in turn the usefulness of
the model be evaluated. Other future work is to figure out whether the
model can be used to guide evaluation. The evolutionary life cycle (model)
hopefully could be used to pinpoint moments in time when evaluation should
take places for best results in regard to the development process. Also, the
scaling before the evaluation stage could guide to what should be evaluated
next.
Acknowledgment
The authors like to take this opportunity to thank fellow colleagues Arianit
Kurti, Marcelo Milrad, Thomas Panas, and Daniel Spikol for their feedback
on this paper.

Abstract
This paper presents a study that was conducted of the development process of an initiative that used podcasts (i.e., digital
audio-files) to supplement lectures in higher education. A thorough data gathering was conducted using the iterative cycles of
the action research approach. The empirical data was analyzed
and this analysis resulted in a framework that shows how sustainability and scalability are linked. The framework also shows how
an initiative is developed from Idea, to Trial, to Project, to Release, and how each of these stages can be described using four
areas of concern, namely, Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization. Using the experience from a specific mobile learning
initiative to define a framework that is then used to conceptualize the development process is a way to bring together practice,
theory, and research, and thus provide reliable evidence for the
framework itself. The framework captures the development process and the relevant context in a unified theoretical attempt and
is suitable for practitioners dealing with initiatives in the field of
mobile learning.
Keywords: action research, conceptual modeling, framework,
mobile learning, scalability, sustainability
10.1 Introduction
The research presented in this paper studies the development process of
a mobile learning initiative involving podcasts (i.e., digital audio-files that
can be listen to “on the go”) in order to better understand the evolution
of it. The development process is then abstracted into a theoretical framework, consisting of text, figures, and the use of references to support the
key concepts it is built upon. This theoretical framework can be used by
practitioners involved in mobile learning to reason about the development
process. In this way some of the complexity involved in development of
mobile learning initiatives can be reduced, at least conceptually speaking
and aid in the set-up phase of new efforts in this field.
Thus, in the process of seeking what can be of a practical orientation,
the aim of this research is to provide new theoretical contributions (e.g., a
framework) based on the local knowledge gained from actively participating
in a mobile learning initiative to aid other practitioners entering in a similar
situation.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows, next is Section 10.2 that
addresses the theoretical fundaments, which this research is based upon,
continued by an introduction to the problem area in Section 10.3. The research approach is described in Section 10.4, followed by a description of the
empirical setting in Section 10.5. In Section 10.6 the framework is brought
119
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
forward and further discussed in Section 10.7. Conclusion and future work
are presented in Section 10.8, followed by limitations in Section 10.9.
10.2 Theoretical Foundation
In this research, the aim are on understanding and interpreting the development process that actually took place, hence the research is done to understand the situation and the process of implementation, use, and impact of a
real information system. From an Information Systems perspective the process of understanding the situation at hand and conduct the development
process in itself is either done by incremental delivery or spiral development
(Sommerville, 2006). According to Royce (1970) the original waterfall model
consists of the following steps: system requirements, software requirements,
analysis, program design, coding, testing, and operations. The steps are in
a sequence, one step has to be finished before the next one is started. The
spiral model was first described by Boehm (1988). The spiral model is an
enhancement of the waterfall model, using an incremental strategy instead
of a strict sequential. The main stages are the same, although some steps
are iterated and for every iteration, the part of the information system that
is produced, is refined. The waterfall model and the spiral model are generic
models, and often used in combination or variants of each other as stated
by Sommerville (2006).
One example of this presented by Kruchten (2000) is RUP, the Rational
Unified Process, which is based on UML, the Unified Modeling Language
and have four phases. The first one is the inception, establishing a business
case and identifying people and systems interacting with the information
system. The second is the elaboration phase, which has the goal to develop an understanding of the problem domain, to establish an architectural
framework for the system, develop the project plan and identify key project
risks. The third phase is the construction phase, dealing with system design, programming, and testing. The fourth and last is the transition phase,
which is concerned with moving the system from the development community to the “real” community and making it work in that environment.
This development process is fundamental knowledge within Information
Systems studies and provide the cornerstone of the theoretical foundation
this research started with, concerning the development process in regard to
develop, implement, use, and understanding the impact of an information
system in the field of mobile learning. Mobile learning as a research field
is emerging, having a rapid growth in development initiatives aimed to
take advantage of learning opportunities offered by portable technologies
(Naismith et al., 2004).
Naismith et al. (2004) continues with stating that the real challenge will
be how to seamlessly integrate (develop, implement, and use) portable technologies in learning situations and sustain their existence in the intended
setting. This research is derived from actively participating in one such
120
10.3 Reaching Sustainability Through Understanding Scalability
initiative and aims to understand, describe, and contribute on how the development process can be interpreted to provide a theoretical framework for
increasing the chances of survival of these initiatives. This is in line with the
ideas of survival put forth by Checkland (1999), so when regarding the development process in mobile learning and the information system to follow,
it should survive changes occurring in the environment. The environment
and its predicaments need to be dealt with accordingly and providing insights gained in form of a bringing forth a theoretical framework addressing
the development process is the goal of this paper.
10.3 Reaching Sustainability Through Understanding Scalability
As mentioned in the previous section, learning supported by mobile devices
need to handle a magnitude of issues due to the inherently complicated
situations, initiatives in mobile learning are exposed to. Mobile learning
has evolved from just a technical tool, aimed to make learning more fun, to
something meant to be a more integrated part of the setting it is brought
into according to Sharples (2000). Few mobile learning initiatives are ever
developed into learning aids (i.e., information systems) that are in wide
use (Keegan, 2005). The problem of initiatives seldom leading to wider
deployment or even further acceptance can be seen as a lack of sustainability,
as mentioned by (Zuga et al., 2006). The problems these initiatives face can
be traced to somewhat vague if not even wrong assumptions in respect to
comprehending the overall situation, i.e., when dealing with techniques,
pedagogics, and people. The number of issues and what follows in terms of
factors to consider clearly is huge and not easy to grasp to full extent.
Hence, in order to increase sustainability, the need to increase understanding follows. To explain further, when looking at a typical mobile learning
initiative, many of these often start as technology oriented activities, as
discussed by Ting (2005). This is reasonable, since technology often is a
limiting factor in what is perceived as possible. However, when you move
from a focus on the technology to learning activities and introduce stakeholders and their requirements for what the initiative and the information
system to follow really should support, you open up a completely new world
with many more factors to consider. This process will continue as you extend your focus to get the relevant picture. Laitinen et al. (2000) refer to
this process as scaling the situation.
In order to understand better the situation and the issues that may have
an impact on sustainability, there is profound need to acknowledge all the
requirements placed on such an initiative — to see the overall setting and
identify the relevant parts — scalability in its essence. The terms of sustainability and scalability are further developed throughout the paper, together
with how a framework is brought forward to describe and explain the development process of an actual mobile learning initiative. In implementing
121
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
mobile learning, the people that are involved, the practitioners, are exposed
to an inherently complex situation, which affects the sustainability of these
initiatives. The word practitioner is used in accordance to the Oxford Dictionary, which defines it as “a person who is actively engaged” (McKean,
2005). The first author of this paper can be seen as a practitioner, who
utilized the approach of action research to gain understanding of a mobile
learning initiative and establish facts and conclusions on a real world phenomenon. This is done in order to help other practitioners placed in the
same position of initiating a mobile learning initiative, providing them with
a better understanding of what they are faced with.
10.4 The Action in Action Research
Given the research question, the answer can be sought by utilizing an action
research approach since an action research approach is designed to bridge
the gap of theory, research, and practice according to Holter and SchwartzBarcott (1993). One characteristic of action research, specified by Hult and
Lennung (1980), is that the approach is applicable primarily to understand
change processes in the real world. Action research often is depicted as
a cyclic process and involves four linked phases (Kemmis and Wilkinson,
1998). These consist of planning, action, observation, and reflection. Thus,
the theoretical contribution emerges through iterations of action research
cycles (Baskerville, 1999). The first author of this paper was new to the
fieldwork connected to a mobile learning initiative per se, but entered the
field with a theoretical, as well a research, background. One major consequences of the choice of an action research approach is that the research is
context-bound as opposed to context-free (Horsburgh, 2003).
It is difficult to determine the cause of a particular effect, which could
be due to environment (including its subjects), researcher, or methodology. Even though the results of action research are qualitative in nature
and attached uniquely to the research, they do offer a degree of external
validity, according to Avison et al. (2008), since the theoretical contribution developed can be interpreted and refined by others in other real world
situations. Furthermore, Avison et al. (1999) say that action research can
address complex real-life problems and of immediate concerns of people in
the field, although the findings as well as their presentation, need to be
in accordance with the audience and often of a descriptive character, as
recognized by Small (1995).
The iterative cycle of planning, acting, observing, and reflecting supports
an analysis of an application area and has been utilized for the research.
Figure 10.1 illustrates this cycle (Riding et al., 1995). The aim was to contribute to the practical concerns of people in a problem-riddled situation
and to develop an understanding that possibly could help increase the competence and self-help ability of practitioners in the field of mobile learning.
In identifying findings and specifying the learning, a framework was devel122
10.4 The Action in Action Research
PLAN
REFLECT ACT
OBSERVE
REFLECT ACT
OBSERVE
REVISED
PLAN
Cycle 1 Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Figure 10.1: The Iterative Cycle of Action Research
oped. The research process of extracting the theoretical framework form
the empirical data is what is targeted in this paper.
In order to analyze the application area, the iterative cycle of the action
research approach was utilized in three iterations. The first two iterations
established the foundation for the continuing use of podcasts to supplement
lectures in higher education. The first iteration studied the construction and
results of surveys (cf. Bell et al. (2007)) and data logs, as well as observing
the initial reactions
From the student body and it was followed by discussions with the initiator of the initiative. After the first iteration, the initiative grew both in
size (i.e., number of stakeholders, students, lecturers, and the university administration) and complexity (i.e., more factors to be made explicit). The
lessons learned from the first iteration as well as the change in the initiative
led to the formalization of themes and the need to understand the demographic characteristics better. The themes were: Technical/Environmental
issues, Podcast content, Pedagogical issues, and Overall impressions. The
demographic characteristics were: Age, Discipline, Gender, and English
language proficiency. This initiated the second iteration, where the issue of
scalability became apparent (cf. Wingkvist and Alexander (2007)).
After returning to the Center for Learning and Knowledge Technologies
(CeLeKT), a research group at V¨axj¨o University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden, the first
author of this paper studied other mobile learning initiatives and noticed
that few results reach a wider audience, particularly in terms of deployment.
The third iteration started with this discovery and introduced the concept
of sustainability, in an effort to systematize the perspectives of the field of
mobile learning (cf. Wingkvist and Kurti (2008)).
In following the approach of action research, reflecting on the process of
the podcast initiative was part of the iterative cycle, and four distinct development stages could be identified. Within each of these stages, four areas
of concern could be identified, as well. These were identified by analyzing
and classifying the questions of the surveys, supporting the scientific contribution and validating the findings. The result of the third iteration cycle
123
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
was the construction of a framework and is a product of interpretation, and
should be regarded as indicative rather than conclusive.
The experience gained during this research enabled the opportunity to
contribute to the theoretical enhancement and define a framework that attempts to illustrate the scaling process leading to a sustainable information
system in the field of mobile learning. The aim is for the framework to be
useful as a thinking aid for practitioners involved in initiatives concerning
mobile learning and provide a mean to understand the situation and handle
the development process accordingly. Next section address the empirical
case, the Podcast initiative, to give an introduction of the actual setting
and practice.
10.5 The Development Process of the Podcast
Initiative
The podcast initiative started with an idea. The initiator, Tim Bell (professor in Computer Science at Canterbury University, Christchurch, New
Zealand), listened to podcasts while doing other activities, such as riding
his bike to and from the university. He imagined that students had similar
activities in their lives and that they would benefit from and appreciate the
ability to refresh course work while doing these often mundane activities
(such as commuting and household chores). A number of concerns grew
from the idea that potentially could affect how well the students accepted
the podcasts as a learning aid. For example, was the technology required,
both to download and listen to podcasts, (such as digital audio players) in
use by the student body? Another concern was whether the students were
willing to, or already did, download and listen to (other) podcasts. A final
concern was the content of the podcasts, for example if complete lectures
should be recorded, or if material should be tailored for the podcast format,
and if so, what kind of material was suitable.
The technology needed to listen to and produce podcasts is not that advanced. A podcast is a digital audio file that can be played on a number of
devices, such as portable digital audio players, mobile phones and computers. The idea was not so much to investigate the technical issues, but rather
to determine if the technology already was being used in the target group.
In order to investigate this, the students were asked to answer a few questions regarding their use of podcasts and digital audio. They also were asked
if they would listen to educational podcasts and, if so, which format they
would prefer (i.e., 1-to-1 sound uptake from lectures, supplementary material, or additional material). The questionnaire was analyzed and used as a
means to gain understanding of the situation. This understanding provided
enough information to support a larger study. The initiative was extended
to cover two Computer Science courses, being around 400 students in all.
The podcasts were produced as a supplement to the traditional teaching,
so it would not affect the students who for some reason did not want to or
124
10.5 The Development Process of the Podcast Initiative
could not adopt the technology.
The primary goal was to investigate how the different types of podcasts
would work in practice and what the students would prefer. Also, by combining learning with such activities, it is necessary to be aware of distractions, the inability to take notes or look up references, etc. Therefore, a
suggestion was made to provide material to supplement the lectures. So,
within the initiative supplementary podcasts were offered to two first-year
Computer Science courses. The two courses offered weekly podcasts. One
of the courses used 20 minute long podcasts with one presenter, while the
podcasts for the other course varied in length (20–60 min) and used two presenters. Both used a similar format; the past week’s material was reviewed,
there were discussions, commentary, interviews with others, future topics in
Computer Science were addressed, and the students were reminded about
upcoming events and deadlines.
Another important goal was to improve the technical solutions and make
the production efficient. In order to test what the students preferred in
terms of material, several different types of podcasts were prepared, ranging
from supplementary interviews and Q&A (questions-and-answers) sessions,
to 1-to-1 sound recorded lectures and even reading from a textbook. These
activities all fit with the educational goal. In order to continue to explore
the state and the potential, a second questionnaire was used to evaluate
what the students experienced.
This questionnaire repeated a few questions from the first questionnaire,
such as if the students would use the podcasts or not. In measuring what
format (lecture versus supplement) the students preferred and how the technical solutions worked out, the questionnaire was used in conjunction with
other collected data, such as download records and observation of the student body.
Several interesting refinements can be noted on the technical side, caused
by the progress from an idea to a small scaled trial. For example, there was
a server crash, which made the podcasts inaccessible for some time. This
might have had an effect on the number of students who tried the podcasts,
since those who did so during the server problem might have been reluctant
to adopt the technology. Similarly, it was discovered that there was a need
for a subscription model, since many students forgot to download and listen
to podcasts when they had to do it manually. Based on the results of the
analysis of the second questionnaire, five weeks later, it was decided to
extend the study again, this time to include more disciplines and in turn
more courses, lecturers, and students. The results also were used to gain
funding from the university for this part of the study. Until now, the study
had been conducted on a voluntary basis.
After the first semester, the number of disciplines that used podcasts
expanded by including courses from Economics, Japanese, Music, and Pedagogic. The initiative also did received funding from the university at this
point and was called a project by the involved people. The format of the
podcasts was similar to the previous step, i.e., both lecture (1-to-1 sound
125
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
Stage Purpose Outcome Key Activities
Idea
Establish soundness of the Plan of how to go ahead Investigate technology
idea Investigate feasability
Establish technical platform Surveys
Trial
Test the idea Information about what Produce podcasts
Elaborate the learning works and what does not Offer podcasts
Small scale testing Considerations made on what Measure how well they are
needs to change in order to receieved
move ahead
Project
Expand beyond initiators Information on how the Similar to trial but larger
Large scale testing podcasts are received, both in scale
Formalized in terms of terms of students and Report to funding
resources and outcome teachers experience organization
Establish social interplay
Release
Hand over to target Implemented and in use Integrate into the
organization organization (training)
Remove reliance on initiators Establish fascilities (servers,
studios, etc)
Table 10.1: An Overview of the Stages of the Podcast Initiative.
uptake) and supplementary podcasts. The use of podcasts was evaluated
throughout the initiative, primarily by questionnaires.
A new and important goal was to investigate the implications of how
different people in different roles are willing to use and accept the technology.
Interesting questions to research were how students learn, i.e., if they prefer
audio or if they need visual aids, the environmental effects (e.g., distraction,
disturbance), and the willingness and ability of other lecturers to produce
podcasts. Another change was that the university now had a stake in the
study. For example, by receiving funding there was now an obligation to
report findings, which might affect already defined structures concerning
the setup and the educational goal. In a similar manner, there was a need
for a larger infrastructure to help lecturers produce podcasts, for example
training, access to a studio, equipment, etc. There also was a need for a
better infrastructure so students could access the podcasts. Furthermore,
there are Internet traffic fees in New Zealand at the university, connected
to the student login accounts, and these fees might affect the willingness
of students to download podcasts. A questionnaire was created to evaluate
the potential and to see if the podcast initiative could be applied to the
whole university. As a consequence of being a visiting researcher, the first
author of this paper left before this evaluation was done. So, no comment
can be made on the further impact of the Podcast initiative. Instead, an
abstraction of the development process from a practitioners standpoint was
brought forth in form of an accessible framework, providing a theoretical
contribution in the field of mobile learning.
The development of the podcast initiative is summarized in terms of
stages, purposes, outcomes and key activities in Table 10.1.
126
10.6 Bringing Forth a Framework
Trial
Idea
Project
Release
Figure 10.2: The Stages of a Mobile Learning Initiative
10.6 Bringing Forth a Framework
As mentioned previously, the framework is based foremost on the experiences with a mobile learning initiative whereby traditional university education, i.e., lectures, was extended and made mobile with the use of podcasts.
The implications of being a visiting researcher resulted in extensive insight
of how the mobile learning initiative developed, but not always why. To
gain this knowledge and investigate the why, factors that could be identified were sought. As the framework started to take form during the work
with the mobile learning initiative involving podcasts, and as the research
continued, the answer to both how and why were found. Finding the relevant results was an outcome from utilizing the process of iterative cycles of
the action research approach. These results then were put together in the
shape of a framework handling the development process, interlinking text
and figures to correspond to the intended audience of practitioners involved
in the process of initiating a mobile learning initiative. Further the key
terms: scalability and sustainability is further developed as intricate parts
of the framework suggested.
Hence, the development of the Podcast initiative was analyzed and four
main stages can be discovered, cf. Figure 10.2. First, there was an idea.
After testing whether the idea would work or not, it was extended to a
trial. During the trial, the findings of the idea were verified using courses
that were running and in turn the students enrolled, together constituting
a relatively highly controlled environment. For the third stage of the study,
a project was started, and funding was introduced, i.e., formalization of the
environment (e.g., disciplines, lecturers, students, technical solutions). The
goal was that the third stage would be the final test of the study, and the
underlying ambition was that podcasts would be released as an educational
aid across the whole university as a result. This would be the fourth stage.
The framework illustrates the development of a mobile learning initiative,
which includes the stages from Idea, Trial, Project, and Release.
The stages introduced can be considered steps in the development of a
mobile learning initiative, and every initiative starts with an idea. The Idea
127
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
generally is a vague notion of what, who, and how, i.e., how should some
kind of learning be transformed to a mobile device and who is the intended
audience. The next step is to try out the idea in a setting where high
degree of control can be gained. With other words, the idea is morphed
into a trial with a more realistic setting but with a high degree of control.
In order to develop from the Idea to a Trial, a deeper understanding of
the problem area is needed. In order to gain this understanding, the Idea
stage needs to be studied closely, and these findings then is combined with
an understanding of the intended target of the trial. The major role of
this stage is to determine if the idea works or not in a relatively controlled
setting. Hence, the Trial stage is carried out with a small group and with
much focus on figuring out what works and what does not. Once this point
is reached, where there is a convincing idea that works in practice, the
next step is to move on to the Project stage. One can say that the trial is
transitioning into a project with an even more realistic formalized setting.
This is done by taking what was learned, study how the environment will
change in the project, and combine them. A project is defined formally with
stated prerequisites and a goal. There still is an interest in understanding
if the idea works or not, but now the move has been made to a setting
that is much closer to the intended setting. It also is important to scale
the number of participants and focus closer on how they interact within
the project. The initiative will remain at the Project stage until it achieves
stability and all the needed knowledge has been gathered. Further, this
knowledge is combined with an understanding of the environment in which
the initiative is intended to be released, and once reached the project would
develop into deployment.
This Release stage occurs when the project ends and the mobile learning
initiative is formally finished and the developed information system is released as a learning product, incorporated into the intended setting without
constant assistance (i.e., technical development, targeted founding) by “external” parties. The overall goal is that the information system be handed
over via natural transition of ownership and responsibility in the project
stage, for comprehensive deployment in the target organization at the next
stage.
Each of the identified stages is distinct and separated from the others by
some kind of reflection, often in the form of an analysis of a questionnaire.
For example, the idea stage ends with the analysis of a questionnaire that
was posed in order to test the viability of the Podcast initiative in the
intended environment.
The important development that happens throughout the process happens within the stages, and all of the stages are separated into main topics.
For example, the first stage was concerned primarily with the acceptance
of the technology and the learning activity. An analysis of the three questionnaires used during the development reveals four major areas of concern.
These can be classified as issues regarding: the technical set up, the learning activity, the social interplay, and the organizational setting. From the
128
10.6 Bringing Forth a Framework
Trial
Idea
Project
Release
Technology Learning Social Organization
Figure 10.3: The Areas of Concern
experience gathered with the Podcast initiative, a mobile learning initiative
can be defined by four areas of concern: Technology, Learning, Social, and
Organization. These areas, as depicted in Figure 10.3, are interconnected
and of equal importance — keeping in mind what the mobile learning initiative as a whole is supposed to achieve. Each area will be the focus of
concern during at least one of the stages.
The Technology area involves all the actual technology needed to realize
the initiative. This includes hardware and software, for example mobile
phones, servers, blogs, etc. The technology often is what is perceived as
the focus, and the limiting force, of any mobile learning initiative. It is
therefore important to acknowledge the technology and its relation to the
entire situation. The second area of concern is the Learning. Learning is
refereeing to a number of considerations that need to be meet, all aimed
to guide a sound knowledge transfer. It is separated from technology since
the technology is there only to facilitate the learning, not to be the center
of it. In a similar manner, its focus is only on the actual translation of the
learning activity to the mobile device in this area and not on the actual
producers and consumers of learning. Since learning is the inherent goal
of any mobile learning initiative, it is important enough to constitute its
own area: how will people learn, what are the important characteristics of
the learning, how can a learning concept be transformed into something
suitable for the initiative, etc.?
The third area of concern is the Social. This includes the people involved
in the process, and the parts they play. All learning will happen in a social
situation, and even if it happens via mobile devices, there will be social
interplay. In order to create a working mobile learning initiative, it is very
important to understand how the people involved “work” and what they
want. The fourth and final area of concern is the Organization. Any work
situation is controlled by rules and regulations — this is the main function
of an organization — as well as to provide support and infrastructure. Any
mobile learning initiative will exist within one or more organizational settings, each complete with agendas, policies, politics, etc. In order to work
with in these organizations it is vital to understand the setting well enough
to be able, at least, to coexist with it.
129
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
Idea Trial Project Release
Stages
Areas of Concern
Technology Learning Organi Social zation
Focus
Figure 10.4: The Development of a Mobile Learning Initiative
The analysis of the development of the Podcasting initiative reveals some
major concepts. The development is divided in to stages and the activities
of each stage addresses four areas of concern. When the initiative moves
from one stage to another, it gets more complicated to deal with and it
scales. In each stage, there is a focus on some areas of concern, and this
focus shifts throughout the stages.
The four areas of concern are interlinked and affect each other, and focus only refers to the foreground area of concern. Changes to the focused
area(s) will affect areas that are not in focus. There is a need to achieve
equilibrium in a stage, with other words there is an evolutionary process
within a stage where a change to one area is reflected by the other areas.
Equilibrium according to the Oxford dictionary is “a state in which opposing forces or influences are balanced” (McKean, 2005), and is a step towards
a sustainable mobile learning initiative. The terms scalability and sustainability are intricate key terms in the theoretical framework suggested and
reaching equilibrium in a stage before moving to the next should always be
the goal.
Next, in text form the reasoning behind these key terms and their relation
are further developed and some of the concepts, showing the development
process, are depicted by Figure 10.4. The concept of focus is shown as an
arrow, which indicate how the attention in respect to areas of concern moves
throughout the development process.
The term scalability has its origin from Computer Science, and is considered a quality of, for example, a network or a system. If an information
system is not scalable, it cannot handle an increase of factors. The understanding of scalability often is vague or subjective, but a number of research
efforts to define this notion have been carried out. Laitinen et al. (2000),
in addition to Weinstock and Goodenough (2006), give a good overview of
the underlying concepts and problems of scalability in system development.
Bondi (2000) in relation to an information system, judge how scalable it is
130
10.7 Discussion
when the information system needs to accommodate to changes, for example
a higher demand in terms of more users or hardware.
Scalability can be considered as the initiative’s ability to evolve. This
growth, in respect to all the four areas of concern should be able to handle
different types and groups of users and organizations with everything that
this entails. There will always be a point at which scalability stops making
sense, i.e., a largest rational organization it can scale to or a “market”
that can be “controlled”. Using this description, scalability can be defined
as the ability to reach a state that matches the pre-set requirements at a
development stage. The more stages at which it reaches these, the more
scalable the initiative is. In this respect, saying that a mobile learning
initiative is scaled to Project stage simply means that the initiative reached
a state in accordance to the specified variables at Idea, Trial, and Project
stages. The components were in unison with each other at each stage.
The term sustainability is defined by Eckersley (1998) as the “ability
to continue an activity or maintain a certain condition indefinitely”. Black
(2004), in connotation to communities and societies, says that sustainability
increasingly is seen as involving three interrelated dimensions: the economic,
the social, and the ecological. These dimensions all need to be considered
when thinking about sustainability in this context. When applied to systems
in a general sense it relies on Beer (1984), who states that a viable system
needs to be organized in a way to meet the demands of an ever-changing
environment in order to survive. The Darwinian saying “survival of the
fittest”, from his theory of natural selection, comes to mind, and a system
needs to be able to maintain a separate existence over time. Therefore, the
end product (i.e., the information system) of a mobile learning initiative
needs to be standalone to its creators and sustain an existence by itself in
the intended setting.
The term sustainability is described as something that can “be maintained at a certain rate or level” to cite the Oxford Dictionary (McKean,
2005). If considering ecological sustainability, it is defined as conserving an
ecological balance. If transferring this kind of striving within the framework, a sustainable mobile learning initiative would be one that reaches
the last stage, i.e., the Release stage, and is incorporated into the targeted
environment. The goal is a mobile learning initiative that survives on its
own merits and adapt to changes in the environment. By combining the
definitions of scalability and sustainability, sustainability is the same as
“maximum” scalability. The key concepts are summarized in Table 10.2.
10.7 Discussion
In the previous section a theoretical contribution in form of abstracting the
development process of a mobile learning initiative was presented. Further,
a reasoning of the key terms of the framework was provided. Thus, the
four areas together form a relevant picture of a mobile learning initiative.
131
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
Stages The development of a mobile learning initiative
goes through a number of Stages. Mobile learning
initiatives go through an evolutionary process that
can be summarized using the following four stages:
Idea, Trial, Project, and Release.
Areas of Concern Each stage deals with a number of concerns or requirements that deal with different aspects of the
mobile learning initiative. There exist an interplay of technical, pedagogical, people-related, and
bureaucratically considerations and these in short
are called the following areas of concern: Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization.
Focus Focus is a way of reducing complexity. Each stage
deals with the areas of concern, but it was found
that certain areas are more prominent during certain stages. By applying focus on particular areas,
these provide the primary concerns to investigate.
Equilibrium The concept of Equilibrium is the measure of
when the inner evolutionary process has reached
a “final” state. When all the concerns within a
stage, both those within areas in focus and those
indirectly affected by the focused areas are in balance, equilibrium has been achieved.
Scalability Scalability indicates how well the initiative is able
to grow. When an initiative reaches equilibrium
at one stage and is able to refine or add to the considerations within the areas of concern that should
be dealt with in the next stage, it scales from one
stage to the next. Scalability is the measure of
how many such scalings the initiative can accomplish.
Sustainability Sustainability is the measure of how well the result
fits the intended setting. An initiative that has
scaled a stage with realistic and “final” concerns
and reached equilibrium at this stage is considered
sustainable.
Table 10.2: The Key Concepts Summarized.
132
10.7 Discussion
However, the focus can and most likely will be on one area at a time and
advance in that manner. For example, during the Idea stage, there will
be some vague ideas about “how”, “what”, and “who”. The most likely
turn of events will be to begin with a focus on Technology and solve that
area before moving on to Learning. The other areas still are present and
important, but the focus is on technical problems and the counterpart of
solutions.
In using the metaphor of a camera, Avison et al. (1998) made the process
of mediation easier to understand. They are comparing it to changes of a
picture as the camera lens zooms in and out and then how to handle the
focus of attention in for example a mobile learning initiative. The focus
will move from one area to another, revisit, and discover if the situation has
changed. One area might be the focus of attention at a particular time, but
the other areas are still present in the peripheral vision. It is possible to see
all four areas at the same time, but only by sacrificing the level of resolution.
By contrast, it is possible to focus in and examine one particular area in
great detail, but at the expense of losing some of the greater context. Think
in terms of a camera lens that zooms in on different parts of a picture, cf.
Figure 10.4. The part that is zoomed in on is sharp and detailed, but the
other parts are still there, even if blurry.
Even if focusing on one particular area, changes to and developments of
that area may influence the other areas. As presented in this section, there
is much interaction going on between the different areas, and even a subtle
change to one area can affect all the others in various ways. An interesting
question is how can these changes be understood and when is it enough:
how do you know when it is time to stop, and in turn when to move on?
Within each stage of the initiative a stable state should be reached since
it will make it possible to better reflect on what is needed in order to
be enhanced for entering the next stage. Reaching that state means that
the initiative is working as planned. An initiative working as planned is
as important during the development as it is during the release stage. If
the initiative is not in accordance with pre-set requirements, it is hard to
measure and extract any meaningful data, which are needed in order to be
able to develop to the next stage. For example, assume that an initiative
is in the Trial stage, in which the initiative is not in line with the plan due
to a poor software solution. The deficient software will reflect badly on the
initiative and it will be hard to separate the poor response that was due to
the software from eventual poor response to the entire initiative.
In a similar manner, development is controlled by specifications and an
information system should at each stage be a complete package at least in
the conceptual sense addressing the four areas of concern. If attempting to
move forward, without making a proper analysis of the findings of the stage
at which the initiative is currently, the possibility to adjust and use this
input for the next stage is lost, ultimately not giving the initiative the best
prerequisites to develop into the next stage. The concept of focus and how
the focus is on one area of concern at a time are discussed. The same holds
133
Publication IV: Bringing a Framework to Tackle the Development Process in Mobile Learning
true for development. In each stage of development, one or a few areas
dominate the focus. This is due to the increasing complexity of the mobile
learning initiative. A simple way to describe the areas of concern is that
each area adds an additional layer of complexity, i.e., factors to consider.
The more complex the initiative gets, the more of these there are to worry
about. In the first two stages, the focus is on getting the technology to
work and dealing with the learning task. Once these two are on acceptable
levels, the later stages focus on introducing producers and consumers of the
learning activity, as well as the organizations that for example, stand for
the founding. These generally are far more complex and need to be in focus
once the first two areas of concern are stable enough to built upon.
10.8 Conclusions
The main contribution of this research is to bring forth a framework, which
shows the evolution of a mobile learning initiative. This paper presents
how empirical data gathered mainly during a podcast initiative was used
to abstract a theoretical framework that models the development process
as well as the relevant situated topics to address. The framework shows
how development of a mobile learning initiative happens in stages, from
Idea, to Trial, to Project, to Release. The activities within each of these
stages addresses four areas of concern: Technology, Learning, Social, and
Organization.
The areas of concern are linked and affect each other. Usually, focus
on one area of concern is applied as a means to reduce the complexity of
the setting. The concepts of sustainability and scalability are used in the
framework to deal with different issues within the stages and the evolution
of the initiative. The key to sustainability is the notion of equilibrium —
to achieve a balanced and steady state — in each stage, before scaling can
happen. This in turn is linked to the acceptance and survival of the mobile
learning initiative. The framework uses stages to model the development
process and areas of concern to model the situation.
The framework was created using the process of iterative cycles of the
action research approach and provides key concepts that show the development process in a way suitable for the intended audience, practitioners
involved in mobile learning initiatives. These key concepts can help the
practitioners reflect upon the development process in many ways. They can
for instance map activities happening within the initiative to concepts in the
framework, reason about these and then translate the findings back to the
activities. Another use is to arrange the setup of new initiatives according
to the framework.
During the research, no models, frameworks, or reflections similar to the
theoretical contribution presented in this paper were found. Even if the
framework defined has yet to be proven general enough to be applied to other
mobile learning initiatives, the model can prove helpful to practitioners in
134
10.9 Limitations
the field of mobile learning and an important future challenge is to test the
framework to determine whether it can be intuitively understood. This test
is done to see if the perceived complexity of a mobile learning initiative can
be understood better and handled accordingly. The development process is
made explicit in relation to the magnitude of factors to follow, which can
aid in identifying both the time (literally) and the issues concerned. To
use the framework to guide evaluation would also be an interesting path to
follow.
10.9 Limitations
The result of this paper is a product of interpretation, and should be seen as
indicative rather than conclusive in any way. Its purpose was to give other
researchers insights gained from actively participating in a mobile learning
initiative and provide a theoretical contribution based on this. This is to
understand better the different findings throughout the research and put
them into a theoretical frame. The framework may be suitable on a general
level for information systems development but the action research approach
does not allow such generalization at this stage as the research is coupled
so closely to the real world situation it was derived from. This coincides
with the point put forward by Susman and Evered (1978), as to that the
framework can work in accordance with all mobile learning initiatives but
it is not a quality inherent to the research approach used.
Further, while conceptual modeling provide a useful way to represent
a mobile learning initiative, it is just a model, and not an “answer” to
sustainability. The idea as such, put forward by Ulrich (1998) is rather
to reflect on ways in which people fail to consider the relevant parts. A
theoretical framework can be used to communicate and represent something,
while the ability to understand things better to improve the situation with
regard to sustainability is ultimately placed on the individual researcher.
Moreover, a problem with the use of models is that many situations can
be hard to model accurately. There are many attributes to consider, and
many of them have intricate relations. More research is needed to give a
more comprehensive solution to this delicate problem and this is merely one
attempt in that direction.
Acknowledgement
The authors want to take the opportunity to profoundly thank editors Andrew Basden and Darek Haftor (perviously known under the last name
Eriksson) for their valuable comments during the review process of this
paper.
135
Abstract
This paper presents a meta-model to describe the development
process of mobile learning initiatives. These initiatives are often
small scale trials that are not integrated in the intended setting,
but carried out outside of the setting. This results in sustainability issues, i.e., problems to integrate the results of the initiative
as learning aids. In order to address the sustainability issues, and
in turn help to understand the scaling process, a meta-model is
introduced. This meta-model divides the development into four
areas of concern, and the life cycle of any mobile learning initiative into four stages. The meta-model was developed by analyzing
and describing how a podcasting initiative was developed, and is
currently being evaluated as a tool to both describe and evaluate mobile learning initiatives. The meta-model was developed
based on a mobile learning initiative, but the meta-model itself is
extendible to other forms of technology-enhanced learning.
Keywords: development process, meta-model, mobile learning
11.1 Introduction
The focus on mobile learning has increased during recent years, and there
is a rapid growth in research initiatives aimed at developing and deploying portable technologies to support learning (Taylor et al., 2006). Mobile
learning has grown from a minor research interest to a set of significant
activities in schools, workplaces, museums, cities, and rural areas around
the world (Sharples et al., 2008). The current mobile and wireless technologies have reached a level of maturity and ability that makes it possible to
support a wide variety of learning activities.
A concern is that few of the mobile learning initiatives (i.e., and the
information system to follow) are ever developed into actual learning aids
that are in wide use (Keegan, 2005). In order for mobile learning to prove
its educational and scientific value, more research initiatives need to develop
into substantial results and tools that are used in massive scale. Naismith
and Corlett (2006) present a retrospective where they look back on the
papers published at mLearn 2002 to 2005, and they find several challenges
related to development and integration of mobile learning. In this paper
we summarize issues similar to those found by Naismith and Corlett as
sustainability issues – cases where the mobile learning simply does not fit
the intended use and environment.
To address the challenges of mobile learning, this paper introduces a metamodel that describes the evolution and development accordingly. There are
many uses for such a model, for example to guide the development of new
initiatives, or to evaluate and understand existing initiatives. The metamodel introduced in this paper describes the life cycle of a mobile learning
initiative using four stages, and each of these stages are divided into four
143
Publication V: A Meta-model Describing the Development Process of Mobile Learning
areas of concern. The meta-model consists of a sequential life cycle where
each stage is iterative. The sequential evolution is referred to as scaling and
the iterative process as the process of reaching equilibrium. Scaling and
equilibrium are important in order to reach sustainability.
This paper uses the term mobile learning initiative to describe any research activity that aims to investigate the use of mobile learning and develop new ways to learn using portable technology. The rest of the paper
is organized as follows. Section 11.2 introduced the meta-model and all its
parts. Section 11.3 presents an analysis of a podcast initiative using the
meta-model. Related work is presented in Section 11.4 and the paper is
concluded by a brief discussion of the findings and future research efforts in
Section 11.5.
11.2 A Meta-model for Development of Mobile
Learning
In this section we introduce the meta-model and describe it. The model is
divided into four stages that show the life cycle of a mobile learning initiative, and each stage can be illustrated using four areas of concern. These
areas of concern describe what can be seen as the different problem areas
that must be addressed. During the life cycle, different areas of concern will
be in focus, but each stage in the life cycle is made up from all the areas,
even if they are not in focus. In this section, we begin by addressing the
four stages, and then the four areas of concern. We then give an account of
the concept of focus, and how it is used in the meta-model.
11.2.1 The Stages of the Life Cycle
The life cycle of a mobile learning initiative consists of four stages: Idea,
Trial, Project, and Release. Depending on the outcome and the scope, it
can be limited to fewer stages, but in the general case, we assume that the
aim of an initiative is a release in a “production” environment. Figure 11.1
shows the four stages of the life cycle.
Everything starts with an idea. This idea can be seen as a vague notion
of what, who, and how. How can a mobile device be used as a learning
aid, how should learning be transformed onto this mobile device, who is the
intended target group, and so on. The major role of the Idea stage is to
establish these concepts, and to verify them. Valid questions are whether
the mobile technology is available and accessible, if the learning activities
can be transferred, will the learning appeal to the intended target group, and
so on. In essence, the Idea stage is about forming an understanding. The
product of the Idea stage is a description of a trial, with specific variables
to test.
The major role of the Trial stage is to determine whether or not a particular idea works in a specific setting. The Idea stage established a number
144
11.2 A Meta-model for Development of Mobile Learning
Trial
Idea
Project
Release
Technology Learning Social Organization
Figure 11.1: The Areas of Concern
of things, and the Trial stage is the first proper test of these. The Trial is
carried out with a distinct user group, and the focus is on figuring out what
works and what does not. One could for example measure how well the
learning translates to the actual technology, or how well the learning works
with respect to the intended target group. The output of the Trial stage is
a description of a project with specific goals.
The Project stage is a more formalized and realistic extension of the Trial.
A Project, in this context, is formally defined with stated prerequisites and
a goal. Generally, a Project require more funding than an Idea and a Trial,
and a project application could serve as the formal definition. The goal of
the Project stage is still to understand if the idea works or not, but now in
a setting that is much closer to the intended setting with a larger number
of participants. Another important goal is to study how the participants
interact within the Project, for example producers and consumers of learning. The outcome of the Project stage should be a description of how the
idea should be integrated into a real setting, and how to be “released”.
The Release stage occurs when the Project ends, and is the release of the
outcome of the mobile learning initiative. This outcome is deployed as an
actual “product”.
The evolution that happens within the life cycle, here depicted in stages,
is a sequential process. Once the Idea stage ends, the Trial stage begins.
Within each stage, there is an iterative process, where things are tested,
verified, and rejected or accepted. It is possible to reject an entire stage
and return to a previous one.
Two important processes happen during the life cycle: scaling and equilibrium. Scaling is the process of moving from one stage to the next. For
example, using the findings from the trial to prepare a project is the scaling
from Trial to Project stage. Finding equilibrium is the process of reaching
balance within a stage. Equilibrium is simply a state that is reached when
everything “works”. The goal of the iterative process within a stage is to
reach equilibrium. Scaling and equilibrium are discussed in more detail in
Section 11.2.4.
145
Publication V: A Meta-model Describing the Development Process of Mobile Learning
11.2.2 The Areas of Concern
The important evolution that occurs throughout the development process
happens within the stages. A mobile learning initiative can be defined
by four areas of concern: Technology, Learning, Social, and Organization.
These areas, as depicted by Figure 11.1, are interconnected and of equal
importance. A change to one of them will affect the others and you cannot
ignore any of them.
The Technology area involves all the technology needed to realize the initiative. This includes hardware and software, for example portable devices,
servers, blogs, etc. Technology is often perceived as the focal point and the
limiting force of any mobile learning initiative, and it is an important part.
This is the reason why technology forms an area of concern.
The second area of concern is Learning. It is separated from technology
since the technology is there only to facilitate the learning, not to be the
center of it. In a similar manner, its focus is only on the translation of the
learning activity to the mobile device in this area, and not on the producers
and consumers of learning. Since to enhance and/or improve learning is the
goal of any mobile learning initiative, it is important enough to constitute
its own area: How will people learn, what are the important characteristics
of the learning, how can a learning concept be transformed into something
suitable, etc.
The third area of concern is the Social. This includes the people involved
in the process, and the parts they play. Learning happens in a social context,
and even if it takes place via mobile devices, there will be social interplay.
In order to create a working mobile learning initiative, it is very important
to understand how the people involved “work” and what they want.
The fourth and final area of concern is the Organization. Any mobile
learning initiative is controlled by rules and regulations; this is the main
function of the organization, as well as to provide support and infrastructure, practical and pecuniary. Any mobile learning initiative will exist
within one or more organizational settings, each complete with agendas,
policies, politics, etc. In order to work within these organizations it is vital
to understand the setting well enough to be able, at least, to coexist with
it.
The four areas together form a complete picture of the mobile learning
initiative. However, this complete picture can be difficult to grasp. To deal
with this difficulty, the model uses focus.
11.2.3 Focus
During the evolution, focus will shift from area to area, and can at times
include more than one area. Hence, focus means that the primary objective at the time is to improve the area(s) addressed. The other areas are
still present and affect and are affected by the work on the area that is focused. Imagine a camera lens that zooms in on different parts of a situation.
The focus will move from one area to another, revisit, and discover if the
146
11.2 A Meta-model for Development of Mobile Learning
Social
Figure 11.2: Focus on the Social Area of Concern
situation has changed. In using the metaphor of a camera, the process of
mediation between the areas is easier to understand. One area might be the
focus of attention at a particular time, but the other areas are still present
in the peripheral vision. The part that is focused dominate the view, but
events outside of the focus can still affect the part being focused and vice
versa. However, it is possible to see all four areas at the same time, but
only by sacrificing the level of resolution. Figure 11.2 illustrates focus on
the Social area of concern.
Each stage of the evolution is an iterative process. Changes to something
will spill over and affect other things, and this process will continue until
the stage reaches a state where it can be considered “good enough”. The
focus shows where the initial changes are most likely to happen, and what
is to be formed and shaped during the stage. For example, in the Idea stage
there are generally vague ideas about the “how”, “what”, and “who” of the
initiative and a focus on technology. The main objective is to evaluate and
evolve the technology to a point where it supports the goal of the initiative.
This in turn means that technology will shape and be shaped by the other
areas of concern.
In each stage of evolution, one or a few areas dominate the focus. Applying focus is a way to handle the increasing complexity of the mobile learning
initiative systematically. A simple way to describe the areas of concern is
that each area adds an additional layer of complexity, i.e., factors to consider. The more complex the initiative gets, the more of these there are to
worry about. In the first two stages, the focus is on getting the technology
to work and dealing with the learning task or activity. Once these two are
on acceptable levels, the later stages focus on introducing producers and
consumers i.e., the social aspects of the learning activity, as well as the
organizations that benefit and support the initiative, financially and with
other means. These generally are far more complex. Figure 11.3 depicts
this change in focus during the evolution.
The purpose of focus in the meta-model can be seen as threefold. First,
focus is used to break down a complex whole into smaller parts that are
easier to grasp and work with. Second, focus allows a working order, where
the area focused is the development target. It is not the only part being
developed, but it will be the main objective. The third purpose is that focus
illustrates the evolution process by indicating where the main difficulty and
complexities will happen in the initiative.
147
Publication V: A Meta-model Describing the Development Process of Mobile Learning
Idea Trial Project Release
Stages
Areas of Concern
Technology Learning Organi Social zation
Focus
Figure 11.3: Focus Changes Throughout the Life Cycle of an Initiative
11.2.4 Scalability, Sustainability, and Equilibrium
As discussed in Section 11.2.1, scaling is the process that happens between
stages in the life cycle. Scalability refers to an initiative’s ability to scale.
Sustainability is a measure of how well an initiative solves the problem it was
intended to solve and how well it fits the setting. An initiative that results in
a learning aid that is in use will have a high sustainability while an initiative
with low sustainability will fail. Scalability affects the sustainability.
Scalability can be considered as the initiative’s ability to grow. This expansion, in respect to all the four areas of concern, should be able to handle
different types and groups of users and organizations with everything that
are entailed for the areas of concern. There will always be a point at which
scalability stops making sense, i.e., a largest rational organization it can
scale to or a “market” that can be “controlled”. Using this description,
scalability can be defined as the ability to reach sustainability at an evolutionary stage. The more stages at which it reaches sustainability, the more
scalable the initiative is. In this respect, saying that a mobile learning initiative is scaled to Project stage simply means that it found balance at the
stages of Idea, Trial, and Project. The components (areas of concern) were
in unison with each other at each stage.
The four areas of concern will have different importance, i.e., focus, during
the evolution of a mobile learning initiative. But, it is still important that
the areas get at least noticed and are in balance at each stage. When a
change is done, it will affect the other areas in different ways, and these may
need to react and adjust. When there is no longer a need for reaction and
adjustment, the stage has reached a state of equilibrium. If a change causes
too much friction between the areas it might result in that equilibrium can
never be reached, and the change needs to be reverted. This can be difficult
and even impossible and if balance is not reached the initiative might “selfdestruct”.
Within each stage, equilibrium signifies a stable state. Reaching that
148
11.3 Using the Meta-model to Analyze a Podcasting Initiative
state means that everything is working as planned. A stage that is working
as planned is as important during the evolution as it is during the release
stage. If the stage is not in equilibrium, it is hard to measure and extract
any meaningful data, which are needed in order to be able to evolve to the
next stage.
For example, assume that an initiative is in the Trial stage, in which
the stage is not in equilibrium due to a poor software solution. The poor
software will reflect badly on the trial and it will be hard to separate the
poor response that was due to the software from eventual poor response to
the idea of the initiative.
11.3 Using the Meta-model to Analyze a Podcasting Initiative
This section presents a Podcasting initiative and an analysis of the initiative
using the meta-model. In this case we use the meta-model to understand
an existing initiative to illustrate how it can be used. As a visiting researcher at COSC, the COmputer SCience Research Group, during fall of
2006 and spring 2007, the first author of this paper had first hand experience of the initiative and it is further described by Bell et al. (2007),
and Wingkvist and Alexander (2007). The aim of the Podcast initiative
was to provide supplementary material to the courses held at Canterbury
University, Christchurch, New Zealand, that students could use while doing
other activities.
The Podcast initiative started with the idea to use podcasts to supplement
the learning experience, which a student is expected to have in a course.
The initiators used the technology themselves and imagined that students
would find it beneficial to be able to refresh course work while doing other
activities, such as household chores, exercising, and commuting to and from
university. The idea grew into a number of concerns, especially about the
technology. Was it in wide use, would the students accept it, and so on.
In order to answer these concerns, and to better understand the setting, a
questionnaire was given to students. The questionnaire measured several
concerns, for example access to digital audio players and podcast usage.
The result provided enough understanding to reach equilibrium at the Idea
stage and helped formulate a Trial. As suggested by the model, the major
focus was on technology.
In order to test the idea, podcasts were used as part of two Computer
Science courses, with approximately 400 students. The two courses offered
weekly podcasts with varying contents, ranging from reading aloud from the
text book to interviews styled sessions with other lectures, business people
or researchers in the field of Computer Science. In order to measure how
well received the podcasts were, a questionnaire and other data sources,
such as download logs were used. Similar to the model, the focus was on
how learning could best be facilitated by podcasts, i.e., how to structure
149
Publication V: A Meta-model Describing the Development Process of Mobile Learning
the content.
The Trial targeted Computer Science students and the initiators created
the podcasts. In order to test how viable the idea really was, other disciplines, students and lecturers had to take part. The Project stage extended
the initiative to cover courses within four other disciplines, i.e., Japanese,
Economics, Music, and Educational studies, with about 400 students. This
was done in order to test how well podcasts suited other disciplines, for example languages studies, and how easy it was for lecturers to produce and
publish podcasts. It was also important to test how well the technology
was accepted by both lectures and students that did not study Computer
Science. While part of the focus was still on Learning, the major focus
was on the Social issues of how producers and consumers of learning work
together using podcasts.
This analysis shows that the meta-model can be used to describe the
project in terms of stages and focus. For a more detailed analysis of the
podcasting initiative using the meta-model, see Wingkvist (2008).
11.4 Related Work
Software development (SD) models are used to structure, plan, and control software development. There are a number of such models, and they
can generally be divided into sequential, iterative, or a combination. The
sequential methods are divided into separate phases, which are carried out
in order. An iterative method is generally divided into smaller phases, and
the full set of phases is iterated over. Examples of sequential models and
iterative models are the waterfall model (Royce, 1970) and prototyping respectively (Larman and Basili, 2003).
Instructional design is the practice of creating instructional content and
tools to help facilitate learning activities. ADDIE (Allen, 2006) is a generic
and simplified instructional system development (ISD) model. The model
is divided into five phases, Analyze, Design, Develop, Implement, and Evaluate. ADDIE is a sequential model where to outcome of the previous phase
is the input of the next step.
The evolutionary life cycle model introduced in this paper shares many
similarities with both SD and ISD models. A difference is that the model
introduced in this paper exists on a meta-level, and SD and ISD models are
used on a more pragmatic level and form the tool set used to deal with the
areas of concern. For example, the Learning area of concern says nothing
about how the learning should be designed and implemented, but rather
that learning, technology and the other areas of concern are connected.
Similarly, the model introduced in this paper models the evolution, but SD
and ISD models can be used for each step of this evolution. This is similar
to the Unified Process for software development (Sommerville, 2006), which
consists of several phases, each with several iterations, and many of the
phases have their own set of methods and models.
150
11.5 Conclusions
Several frameworks and meta-models that aim to aid and improve the
development and understanding of mobile learning initiatives have been
published. Many of these address only on one or a few aspects of mobile
learning, and in this section the interest is only on frameworks and metamodels that intend to capture the entire development process.
Taylor (2004) presents an evaluation framework for the MOBIlearn project
that illustrates to some extent the evolution and the order in which different
areas are in focus. She starts from a technological standpoint and continues
with pedagogical considerations, and socio-pedagogical perspectives, while
acknowledges the influence of the data counter flow. The ideas behind this
framework resemble those of the meta-model presented in this paper, though
only from an evaluation point of view.
Laouris and Eteokleous (2005) make an attempt to create a systematically
complete framework to define mobile learning. This framework is expressed
using mathematical notation and use functions to describe relations and
dependencies between elements, e.g., content, IT, learning environment.
In terms of intent, this framework is similar to the meta-model, but uses a
completely different approach to describe the elements and the development
process.
Vavoula and Sharples (2008) propose a framework built on holistic and
systematic evaluation divided in three levels of granularity, i.e., micro, meso,
and macro, to guide the data collection when designing, implementing, and
deploying a mobile learning initiative. Thus, the requirements analysis persisted throughout the initiative’s life cycle, and covered all three levels of
analysis. They conclude that mixed methods are increasingly present in
the design of evaluation activities for mobile learning. The core approach
of continuously addressing granularity and employing strategic evaluation
compare well to the view of stages and focus of the meta-model in this paper, but the pragmatic approach differ since the meta-model can provide a
main focus for each development stage, as well as to what to evaluate.
11.5 Conclusions
In this paper we present a meta-model that is used to describe the life
cycle and development of mobile learning. The meta-model can be used
for example to guide new development efforts or to evaluate existing mobile
learning initiatives. The paper further presents an analysis of an existing
initiative using the meta-model.
The main contributions of this paper are the life cycle model and how
it relates to the concepts of equilibrium, scalability, and sustainability. By
linking the sequential evolution, i.e., the scaling of a system, and the iterative process within the stages, i.e., the process of reaching equilibrium, the
sustainability of a mobile learning initiative can be defined as being able
to scale to and reach equilibrium at the last stage of the life cycle. A sustainable system is a scalable system. Another important concept is focus
151
and the way focus allows for targeting different areas of concern during the
evolution. The metaphor of a camera lens makes it is easier to understand
focus and how to deal with the complexity involved when undertaking a
mobile learning initiative. This provide an intuitive notion of what happens
during a stage, and how one should consider all areas of concern.
The meta-model is currently being used to evaluate and understand other
technology-enhanced learning initiatives. We are interested in using it to
study initiatives that do not use portable technologies to see how well the
meta-model works in those cases. There is nothing in the meta-model that
specifically ties it to mobile learning, so we believe that it is general enough
to cover other forms of technology-enhanced learning as well. We are also
interested in using the meta-model to guide the development of a new initiative for a more “hands-on” experience.
Acknowledgements
The authors like to take this opportunity to thank fellow colleagues Welf
L¨owe, Marcelo Milrad, Anita Mirijamdotter, and Thomas Panas for their
input.

Publication VI
Dealing with Stakeholders in
Mobile Learning: A Study of
Three Initiatives
Anna Wingkvist
V¨axj¨o University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden
Morgan Ericsson
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
This publication was included in Proceedings of the 32nd Information Systems
Research Seminar in Scandinavia (IRIS’32), Molde University College, Molde,
Norway, 9–12 August 2009. Molka-Danielsen, J. (ed.), ISBN: 978-82-7962-120-1.

Abstract
There is a need to reach viable design for initiatives in mobile
learning and researchers are faced with a magnitude of factors to
consider. The work to identify and access stakeholders and acknowledge their requirement is a difficult task. Most mobile learning initiatives often follow an evolutionary development process
where the system is constructed, evaluated, and refined in increments. During this process, the stakeholders and their needs might
change, so even if there was an initial understanding, it might not
be correct after one or more increments. In this paper we studied
three initiatives with a focus on how they dealt with stakeholders
during the development process and finds that the three initiatives
deal with stakeholders in an on-demand fashion. New groups of
stakeholders are considered when needed, and this leads to a development process that is a mix between sequential and evolutionary,
which results in inflexible system solutions. In order to improve
on this, stakeholders need to be regarded in a more inclusive fashion, where they are considered as part of the entire development
process.
Keywords: development process, mobile learning, stakeholders
12.1 Introduction
Mobile learning has grown from a minor research interest to a set of significant activities in schools, workplaces, museums, cities, and rural areas
around the world, meaning that the knowledge base on how to develop
and integrate mobile learning is rapidly increasing (Kukulska-Hulme et al.,
2009). What was perceived to be a more technological issue, with the main
task being, to develop the mobile technology and to get users to use it, is
shifting more towards, to understand and enhance the integration per se, including dealing with stakeholders. Technology will always be an important
part of mobile learning since it is the prerequisite, but more weight in future
efforts is to be placed on to understand pedagogic and people-related factors. These factors can often be found to be the most problematic aspects to
handle when to develop and integrate mobile learning in a specific setting.
Although difficult, these aspects are not unmanageable and some attempts
have been made to increase the body of knowledge in this area, targeted
specifically to the mobile learning community (Cobcroft, 2006, Traxler and
Kukulska-Hulme, 2005). McFarlane et al. (2008) note that most of the
papers presented in the field of mobile learning is based on small singlecase studies with little to no comparison made, with few trying to extract
valuable insights from a more extensive data set.
Mobile learning as a new field of research might on one hand need to read
up on lessons learned from more established disciplines such as Computer
Science, Human Computer Interaction, and Information Systems, but on
159
Publication VI: Dealing with Stakeholders in Mobile Learning
the other hand also build up its own knowledge base and create some distance to other research interests according to Vavoula and Sharples (2008).
Experience based on trial-and-error practices need to be consolidated, and
in turn able to be incorporated into future research conduct (Naismith and
Corlett, 2006). Mobile learning researchers exist in a delicate development
zone, where stakeholders and their requirements need to be dealt with accordingly. Parsons et al. (2006) state that the exist a need to manage
all stakeholders involved and honor the integrity of all parties, in order to
reach viable design of a mobile learning initiative. Wingkvist (2008) suggests and separates technology, learning, social, and organizational aspects
as the main four areas of concern that need to be addressed in respect to
the development process of a mobile learning initiative to reach just that.
The focus of this paper is on how three mobile learning initiatives dealt
with their stakeholders and requirements. Sharples et al. (2008) mention
that this type of analysis is not commonly found in the field of mobile learning and consequently of great interest despite the large number of research
initiatives initiated over the last years as Taylor et al. (2006) acknowledge.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses development process and stakeholders, and why these are important and related.
Section 3 presents the three initiatives, and also contains an analysis of
the initiatives according to technology, learning, social, and organization
aspects, and their evolution, respectively. Section 4 contains a discussion,
and Section 5 concludes the paper.
12.2 Theoretical Foundations of the Development Process and Dealing with Stakeholders
The first author, coming from an Information Systems background, can
confirm via the study, many of the traditional people-related issues related
to dealing with stakeholders in a development process perspective. However,
managing the complexities involved in developing and integrating mobile
learning still needs to be enhanced, as it is a unique and young research
field. The uniqueness comes from the learning aspect, as it is not one-toone in respect to a business process, which is often the core aspect in an
Information Systems development.
However, Sharples (2000) state that the actual development process in a
mobile learning initiative is closely related to that of Information System
development and shares most of the characteristics. Any system development process can very roughly be described as finding out what to do, do
it, and verify that it was done. The steps are often elaborated and can be
done sequentially or evolutionary. In a sequential model, for example the
“waterfall model” (Royce, 1970), every step is carried out fully in sequence,
and returning to a previous step can carry large penalties (for example an
160
12.3 Overview of the Study
increase in time or cost or both). While, in an evolutionary model (Boehm,
1988), the development happens in increments that go through the steps
of the sequential model. Each increment refines the previous, until a satisfactory result is produced. Examples of evolutionary models are Rapid
Application Development (RAD), Extreme Programming (XP), and Agile
development.
Any mobile learning initiative has a number of stakeholders, persons or
groups that will be affected by it directly or indirectly. According to Barker
et al. (2005) the stakeholders of a mobile learning initiative are: the learners, the teaching staff, the system designers and engineers, along with device
vendors, and the institution representatives that oversees and “owns” the
initiative. Hence, stakeholders can be end-users, who interact with the
system directly, designers responsible for the architectural framework, engineers managing this and related systems, the person who commissioned
the system and so on. Each stakeholder holds evidently a stake, a need
or a want, in the system that should be captured. The needs and wants
are referred to as requirements and finding them is a co-operative process
of learning in which requirements are explored, classified, prioritized, negotiated, and documented according to Sommerville (2006). Finding the
correct stakeholders and the most important requirements is crucial in any
system development process.
As mentioned, sequential and evolutionary processes differ in how they
handle the stakeholders during the development process. A sequential process model deals with requirements at the start and after the first phase the
requirements are locked down. In an evolutionary process model, each increment deals with stakeholders, and thus provides a much closer feedback
loop between developers and stakeholders.
Many mobile learning initiatives follow an evolutionary development process, with changing and addressing stakeholders in turn. In order to better
understand how this change is handled, this paper studies three mobile
learning initiatives with respect to how they dealt with their stakeholders.
It is important to study both how the stakeholder group changed during
increments as well as how stakeholders were included in the evolution.
12.3 Overview of the Study
In this section three mobile learning initiatives are presented in chronological order, which the first author of this paper had access to during recent
years, being a researcher at CeLeKT, Center for Learning and Knowledge
Technologies, at V¨axj¨o University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden and a visiting researcher
at COSC, the COmputer SCience Research Group, at Canterbury University, Christchurch, New Zealand. This section introduces the three initiatives (unit of analysis) that are later discussed in the paper. Whereas this
form of field study is a well-established form of research (Klein and Myers,
1999), the result is a product of interpretation, and indicative rather than
161
Publication VI: Dealing with Stakeholders in Mobile Learning
conclusive. It should however be a valuable contribution to, and added to
the pre-existing knowledge base in the community of mobile learning.
First, each initiative is briefly presented with a focus on the purpose, the
target group and how it was carried out. Secondly, the same initiative is
analyzed in relation to the four areas of concern, addressing in turn technology, learning, social, and organization examples found. In short, the aspect
of technology focuses on the technology used to support the learning, while
the learning aspect focuses on how learning objectives were translated to
the system platform. Next, the social aspect studies how for example students and teachers interact with each other and the technology, and lastly
organization is about how the new learning activity fits into the existing
setting. The four perspectives, areas of concern, are further explained in
Wingkvist (2008). This is followed thirdly by an account on how the evolution happened for the initiatives. This section describes the different phases
that the initiatives went through and how the initiatives changed in relation
to stakeholders between these increments.
12.3.1 The AMULETS Initiative Introduced
AMULETS (Advanced Mobile and Ubiquitous Learning Environments for
Teachers and Students) (Kurti et al., 2007; 2008) is an initiative that explores how teachers can develop and implement novel educational scenarios
that combines out-doors and in-doors activities using mobile technologies.
Students are given a number of tasks, missions, to accomplish. The learning is centered on these tasks as well as the extra skills required to accomplish the tasks, for example collaboration and problem solving. The students
have classroom activities before they are given the tasks, and the mobile
technologies as well as teachers support the students during the tasks. The
tasks are then followed up in the classroom once again to strengthen the
learning loop.
The students use the mobile technologies to access information and interact with the environment using location information or special codes. They
can also collaborate with other groups by sending instant messages and rich
media files. The devices allow the students to document the environment
by taking photographs or recording audio and video. The recorded data is
automatically stored and tagged with location information so it can be displayed on interactive maps. This allows for the discussion and exploration
to continue in the classroom and the data can also be used to support future
outdoors tasks (follow-up studies, for example).
AMULETS was divided into three trials that took place in 2006 and 2007.
The first two trials were conducted in collaboration with an elementary
school in V¨axj¨o and the students were 4th and 5th graders (children 10–
12 years old). The third trial was done in collaboration with the teacher’s
education program at V¨axj¨o University and their students (18–35 years old).
The first and third trial explored the nature, and tasks included identifying
and measuring the age and height of trees in the forest. The second trial
162
12.3 Overview of the Study
focused on local history and missions included decoding Roman numerals
and identifying the tools a blacksmith used in a specific historic setting.
12.3.2 The AMULETS Initiative Described by the Four
Areas of Concern
Technology: AMULETS uses two-dimensional visual codes (i.e., semacodes)
and positioning information. A mobile device, a Smartphone, is used to scan
the semacode (often by taking a photo of it using the camera function).
Software on the Smartphone translates the semacode into a web address,
a URL, that points to a resource. This resource can for example be a
video that is displayed or a registration that some specific goal has been
achieved. One use of semacodes is to start each mission; the students scan
the semacode and as a result get an animated video telling them what the
mission is.
Positioning information is captured using a Smartphone with a GPS. This
information is mainly used to annotate recorded material, such as movies
or pictures, so it can be placed on a digital map. This can in turn be used
for post-activities in the classroom.
The second and third trials used a portable computer with a wireless
(i.e., GPRS) Internet connection, and it was used to find information using
various web sites. In AMULETS custom-made software was used both for
clients and servers, to support the mobile devices.
Learning: The learning activities were implemented in a task-oriented
way. The students were given missions that they needed to accomplish.
The missions were rated, so students scored points and this turned the
learning into a game with competition between the teams of students. A
mission can be to identify a tree or to decode Roman numerals on a city
building. Apart from learning about the actual tree or Roman numerals,
the students should also learn how to approach and solve problems, and
how to negotiate and collaborate in groups. In many cases the learning was
supported by pre- and post-activities. For example, in the first trial, the
students took part of a pre-activity that taught them the various tree types
and how to identify them. The skills they picked up during this activity
were then used in nature during the missions.
Social: The students were divided into groups and had to share the smart
phones within the group designated to. One of the goals was to learn how
to collaborate within the group. In the later trials, the students also had
to collaborate between groups, when one group was inside and the other
outside and had access to different sets of information. For example, one
group had access to the actual Roman numerals and the other group had
access to instructions on how to decode them, which leads to a need to
communicate with each other.
Organization: AMULETS was not initiated by the educational institutions, which make up the setting, but rather as a research oriented initiative
to explore the potential of mobile technologies in learning activities. Own163
Publication VI: Dealing with Stakeholders in Mobile Learning
ership and operation still remain with the research group. However, during
one of the trials university students that are studying to become teachers
were used as subjects. This can be seen as an attempt to educate the teachers of tomorrow about the possibilities of mobile learning, connecting it to
potential future partners in the educational sphere.
12.3.3 AMULETS in Terms of Practice and Progress
AMULETS was divided into three trials, and each trial represented a major
change to the initiative. The first trial was carried out at an elementary
school in V¨axj¨o during spring 2006. Students were divided into teams of
roughly four children each and each team was equipped with two smart
phones, one for controlling the game and one for content creation. The
learning activity itself was divided into three stages, a pre-activity, a field
activity and a post-activity. The pre-activity was conducted in the classroom and taught the students about the forest, for example how to identify
trees in respect to species. The teams conducted the field activity over two
days, one team at a time. During the post-activity in the classroom, the
students presented the material they had produced (photos, audio, video)
during the field activity, using digital maps to associate the material with
locations.
The members of a team had to collaborate to solve the tasks they were
given. The material the students needed to solve the tasks was either available from the mobile device, or from the pre-activities in the classroom or
teachers in the field.
In the second trial, each team was divided into two subgroups. One
subgroup was assigned to perform tasks in the field (outdoors) while the
other subgroup performed tasks at a museum (indoors). The two groups
that formed a team had to collaborate both within the groups as well as
between the groups to carry out the tasks assigned. Each of the two groups
within a team had five members.
The outdoors group was given three smart phones. Similar to the first
trial, one phone was for control mechanism and the other for content generation. The third phone was for instant messaging between the two groups.
The indoors group had access to a portable computer with a wireless (GPRS)
Internet connection as well as a smart phone for photography and instant
messaging. The two groups communicated by sending messages and photographs. A student from the teacher-training program at V¨axj¨o University
supervised each group.
Each of the two groups within a team had access to different information
and had to collaborate to perform the task assigned. For example, the
outdoors group was asked to find a specific building with Roman numerals
and decode them. The indoors group was given instructions on how to
decode the numerals. So, in order to solve this task, the outdoors group
had to photograph the Roman numerals, send the photograph to the indoors
group. The indoor group then used the instructions to decode the numbers
164
12.3 Overview of the Study
and sent the decoded number to the outdoors group, who then scanned the
correct code (see Section 4) and “solved the puzzle”.
Each group in the second trial was assigned either to the field or the
museum. In trial three, it was changed so that groups swapped during the
activity and tried both roles. Another change compared to the second trial
was that the number of devices was reduced. The idea was to make the
communication between the groups more efficient, so communication was
mainly carried out using recorded audio and video or photographs. Another
change was that specific communication codes were used to send media to
the indoors group. The task of the third trial was similar to the first, i.e.,
to identify trees.
AMULETS changed in several ways over the three stages. The collaboration changed from between members within a team to between members
within subgroups and between subgroups of a team. The activity changed
from being sequential both within a team and between teams to parallel
between the two groups of a team and the different teams. Another change
was how the individuals communicated. In the first trial, everyone could
talk to everyone, while the second and third trial relied on messaging and
recorded material.
12.3.4 The Podcast Initiative Introduced
The Podcast initiative is a research incitement at Canterbury University,
Christchurch, New Zealand, aimed to utilize the inherent mobility and provide supplementary material to a number of courses in various disciplines
during 2006 and 2007 (Bell et al., 2007, Wingkvist and Alexander, 2007).
Podcasting is a way of providing digital audio or video content. The digital audio or video content is stored at a remote server, and made available
for download using web syndication technology. Special software is used to
subscribe to podcasts and new content is automatically downloaded to a
local client when it is published.
By good use of the mobility of digital audio players and the possibility to
listen to audio- only podcasts “on the go”, students can be offered a way to
extend the number of hours they study without imposing on the time they
need for other activities such as household chores, commuting, and exercise.
Students studying Computer Science, Japanese, Economics, Music, and
Education were provided supplementary podcasts with varying contents and
formats. For example, while one of the courses used 20 minute long podcasts
with one presenter, the podcasts for the other course varied in length (20–60
min) and sometimes used two presenters. Often the past week’s material
was reviewed, there were discussions and commentary, interviews, questions
and answer sessions, future topics were addressed, and the students were
reminded about upcoming events and deadlines. While experimenting with
the content of the podcasts over the length of the courses, complete oneto-one sound uptake of lectures were also provided as podcasts, just to see
how many students would download those.
165
Publication VI: Dealing with Stakeholders in Mobile Learning
The initiative assumed that students had access to devices that they
could use to listen to the podcasts, for example portable audio players (mp3
players), mobile phones or computers. It was up to the students to subscribe
to, download and listen to the material. In order to not affect the students
that elected not to use the podcasts, all the material was supplementary
and not required listening to pass the courses.
12.3.5 The Podcast Initiative by the Four Areas of Concern
Technology: The podcasting initiative used podcasting technology to supplement higher education. A podcast is nothing more than a digital audio
file, which can be played on a number of devices, ranging from computers to
mobile phones and portable digital audio players (mp3 players). In order to
make it easier for the students to remember to download the digital audio
files, special software and aggregators (such as iTunes) are often used to
allow users to “subscribe” to podcasts, i.e., to automatically download new
files to the players and keep track of which podcasts the student has already
listened to. Such software solutions are widely available. The podcast initiative assumed that the students had access to devices so they could listen
to the podcasts.
The technology required to produce and publish podcasts is also simple.
A microphone and software to record and produce a digital audio file of the
right format is required. Such software is widely and often freely available.
Learning: A major learning goal of the podcasting initiative was to offer
the students the possibility to refresh course material while doing everyday
activities such as household chores or exercising. In order to do this, it
experimented with a number of different formats of the podcasts. This initiative focused on supplementary material, for example question and answer
sessions, interviews, in-depth discussions of certain topics, and so on.
Social: The social aspects of the podcasting initiative mainly concern the
production of podcasts and the interaction between students and teachers
using pre-recorded material. It is generally hard to get feedback on material
posted in podcasts. The students listen to them “on the go” without access
to ways to provide feedback, and often forget what they wanted to say before
they gain access. The podcasts produced did include a current information
segment, which reminded students about upcoming deadlines, presented
news, and so on. This helped to build a connection.
Organization: The Canterbury University was the setting of the Podcast
initiative. Issues that was dealt with in this context was for example access
to recording equipment and studios in order to produce new podcasts and
support for the students and lecturers, both in terms of technical assistance
and in resources (money and/or time).
166
12.3 Overview of the Study
12.3.6 The Podcast Initiative in Terms of Practice and
Progress
The podcast initiative aimed to supplement higher education with audioonly material that students could use to refresh course work while doing
other everyday activities such as household chores or exercising. The evolution of the podcast initiative happened in three stages, with an increase
in scope in each stage.
At the time the initiative was initiated (autumn 2006), podcasting was a
common phenomenon. The first stage investigated how known and accepted
podcasting was within the student body as well as how many had access to
portable digital audio players. Students were also asked if they would listen
to educational podcasts and, if so, what format they would prefer (recorded
lectures, topical issues, etc.).
The second stage introduced supplementary podcasts for two first-year
Computer Science courses. The two courses offered weekly podcasts. One
of the courses used 20 minute long podcasts with one presenter, while the
podcasts for the other course varied in length (20–60 minutes) and used
two presenters. Both used a similar format; the past week’s material was reviewed, there were discussions and commentary, future topics were discussed
and the students were reminded about upcoming events and deadlines.
The third stage expanded the number of courses and disciplines that used
podcasts by including Economics, Education, Japanese, and Music. The
initiative also received funding from the university at this point. The format
of the podcasts was similar to the previous stage, i.e., both lecture (one-toone sound uptake) and supplementary podcasts. The use of podcasts was
evaluated throughout the initiative, primarily by questionnaires.
The podcast initiative used a careful, feedback-driven process as it evolved
between the stages. In each stage, feedback was gathered and this feedback
was used to improve upon the current stage and to plan how to increase the
scope while still taking the feedback into account. For example, the lessons
learned about the format of podcasts from stage two was preserved as a set
of guidelines that were taken into account in the third stage.
12.3.7 The Skattjakt Initiative Introduced
Skattjakt (Spikol, 2009, Spikol and Milrad, 2008) (Treasure Hunt in English)
is a mobile game inspired by treasure hunt activities and orienteering. Orienteering is a traditional Swedish running sport that involves navigation
with a map and compass. The initiative was originally conceived and developed to encourage young people to get physically active.
The game is generally a mystery set in a specific scenario that needs to be
solved. A strong narrative often drives it and the playing field is set across
relevant locations. The specific puzzles that need to be solved represent the
learning and should suit the mystery and the locations. For example, the
first instance of Skattjakt involved the ghost of a local countess and was
167
Publication VI: Dealing with Stakeholders in Mobile Learning
set around the castle where she originally lived. The game aimed the teach
students about local history.
Students playing the game were divided into teams, and several teams
can compete against each other. Each team is given a map with locations
and each location is a problem that needs to be solved in order to reveal
the next location. An incorrect answer will result in a penalty, a detour,
that will increase the time it takes for the team to finish the game/route.
Playing the game involved informal map reading skills, problem solving,
learning across different domains and collaboration within the team.
Each team is given a mobile phone that they use to play the game. The
phone displays an interactive map that players can zoom and pan out on.
When a team encounters a problem they enter a code, and the application
running on the phone presents the problem description. The software provides clues, and an answer (correct or incorrect) will reveal a new location
on the interactive map that the team needs to find next. The teams can
also document their surroundings by taking photographs or recoding audio
and video. The recorded material will automatically be stored and tagged
with location information. The routes taken and the gathered material are
presented on a digital map that can be used for post-activities after the
game is finished.
Skattjakt has been played a number of times between 2007 and 2008.
During the pilot children aged 12–16 played the game. Some of these children were then selected to develop a new game (mystery) that was later
played by other students. This was then repeated and Skattjakt has now
evolved into the mLearn2go platform that can be used by any teachers to
create new games suitable for their curriculum.
12.3.8 The Skattjakt Initiative by the Four Areas of
Concern
Technology: Skattjakt uses mobile phones with custom made software to
display an interactive map, deliver clues and puzzles. The technical platform
was at first kept to a minimum and did not use features such as semacodes or
GPS for positioning. Instead it uses numeric input for solving the puzzles.
By using a minimal technical platform, a wider range of mobile devices can
be used. However, later versions of the software included support for more
advanced features (such as semacodes and GPS). The students could access
audio clues to help solve the puzzles.
When students encountered a puzzle or a landmark there is a numeric
code that they need to enter into the phone. In a similar manner, the
different alternatives when answering a puzzle all have a numeric code, and
the students enter the code that they think is correct.
The students also had access to mobile phones with camera function that
they could use to document their experience. The recorded material was
automatically annotated with positioning information from the GPS.
Learning: Skattjakt uses puzzles and scenarios to support the learning
168
12.3 Overview of the Study
activities. The students are faced with a number of puzzles that they need
to successfully solve. The puzzles are part of a scenario; a story or setting
that enhance the learning. For example, one trial used a narrative approach
in the shape of a ghost of a real historical figure to teach the students about
local history. In order to access the puzzles, the students need to use an
interactive map to navigate. So, the students also learn navigation skills
and collaboration within the groups.
Social: The students were divided into groups and had to share access
to the smart phones. They had to collaborate within the group to solve
the various puzzles. In later stages of Skattjakt, the students also became
involved in the design of future scenarios and puzzles. As part of this stage,
the students interacted with teachers and members of the research team.
Organization: Skattjakt has evolved from the product of collaboration
between researchers and a local orienteering club from V¨axj¨o to something
that includes a complete authoring system, allowing anyone to create content. From an organizational point of view, it has evolved into something
that can be integrated into a setting since content can be customized and
made to suit particular needs and requirements.
12.3.9 The Skattjakt Initiative in Terms of Practice and
Progress
The evolution of Skattjakt can be divided into four stages that happened
during 2007 and 2008. The idea behind Skattjakt was to combine treasure
hunting and orienteering as a game to encourage physical activity. Students solved puzzles and answered questions at each control/location and
this made up the learning part of the game. Each answer revealed a new location/control. Incorrect answers resulted in a detour that in turn extended
the route to finish. Teams of students played the game, and each team had
access to mobile phones to run the game and to document their experience
(photos and video).
The first instance of Skattjakt was a joint collaboration between a research
group called CeLeKT — Center for Learning and Knowledge Technologies
— at V¨axj¨o University, and a local orienteering club. The game was set at
and around a local castle and the mystery involved local history and local
historical figures. A countess returns as a ghost and needs help to solve a
mystery regarding her husband, the duke.
The main change from stage one to stage two was not in the way the game
was played or in the technology driving the game, but rather in the design
of the game. The second stage game was designed by students (13–15 years
of age) at a local school as part of an elective course during the 2007–2008
semester in collaboration with the research team. The students designed a
new mystery where the players had to find hidden heat transmitters contributing to global warming that aliens had placed in the city. The new
design also introduced ways to sabotage the other teams by forcing them to
take a detour as well as power-ups to protect the team from sabotage. These
169
Publication VI: Dealing with Stakeholders in Mobile Learning
Figure 12.1: Dealing with Stakeholders in the Development Process
features played very well during design and testing, but did not translate
very well to the actual game play. When playing the outdoors game, players
were spread out over the city, and this made the sabotage and power-ups
work poorly. The students, who played the game where from other schools
in the region and in the same age-range.
Students also designed the game in the third stage and together with
their teacher became the driving force of the game design process, and they
developed a game concept similar to the board game Cluedo (inspired from
the word Clue). This time the game was played as part of a field trip
for younger students (9–12 years of age). These students had to perform
informal activities, such as obstacle courses or sorting recyclables to collect
clues in order to solve the mystery.
Stage four of Skattjakt shifted focus from the design of games to the actual
design process. In this stage the requirements specification for an authoring
tool that could be used to design and create games was developed. From
the specification, prototypes were developed which resulted in the mlearn2go
platform that can be used to design, create and run games.
The focus of Skattjakt evolved from focus on a particular game to the
design process of future game. The control of the game content slowly
shifted from the research group to the teachers and students over the four
stages.
12.4 Discussion
Dealing with stakeholders and their requirement is a sensitive task but the
most important part of system development, and need to be addressed with
delicate hands. In the previous sections, three mobile learning initiatives
have been presented and analyzed with respect to four areas of concern,
namely technology, learning, social, and organization. The practice and
progress (i.e., development process) was also studied and found to be evolutionary for all three of the initiatives.
In an evolutionary development process, the four areas of concern are of170
12.4 Discussion
ten dealt with in the order specified. First the technology should work, then
learning is considered, while social and organizational aspects follow. This
was previously suggested by Wingkvist (2008) in regard to how o handle
the complexity involved when undertaking a mobile learning initiative. The
groups of stakeholders are treated in a similar fashion, and included “on
demand” when their expertise is needed. For example, when shifting focus
to learning, the teachers are included in the process. Figure 12.1 depicts
this process. Barker et al. (2005) names five groups of stakeholders to a
mobile learning initiative in an educational setting: the learners, the teaching staff, the system designers and engineers along with device vendors, and
the institution representatives. When studying the three initiatives it was
found that two of these groups, system designers and engineers along with
device vendors, were very similar in terms of what effect their requirements
had on the system. This paper therefore groups these two into one and only
notice four groups of stakeholders.
The four groups of stakeholders are addressed in turn during the development process, and each group can be matched to one area of concern. For
example, when the development switches from technology to the learning,
the stakeholders in the teacher group are the ones that pose the requirements. This is similar to concept of focus, suggested by Wingkvist (2008)
where one area of concern is the focal point at a stage of the development,
but with a major difference. Focus mainly considers one area but still keeps
the others in the periphery, while the stakeholders are exclusive to one stage.
A focused area can affect and change other areas, but the requirements of
a group of stakeholders will neither affect nor be affected by other groups
in an increment where that group is being considered.
However, the key discovery found in this study is that these three mobile
learning initiatives have been dealing with stakeholders by mixing sequential
and evolutionary approaches in the development process. It is sequential
in the sense that stakeholder requirements are considered once and never
changed, but evolutionary in the sense that different stakeholders are considered during different increments. In essence, this result in a system built
like a tower, where the requirements of each stakeholder group forms a
bricklayer.
Building a system layer by layer, with each layer specifying its own set
of requirements can result in inflexible system solutions, as each layer will
decide on certain requirements that cannot be change at a later date. For
example, if the technical platform does not support video, the learning activity cannot require video. Both teaching staff and learners often find the
technology exciting and fun, and pose relatively few requirements on it. It
is often viewed as an extra curricular activity and an add-on. However,
when the system is to be integrated into the institution, several more requirements are posed, and the inflexible system structure often struggles
to meet these. For example, MyArtSpace (Sharples et al., 2008) enabled
learners to use mobile technology to explore a museum. The initiative was a
success on many levels, but failed to consider some every day practicalities
171
of the mobile technologies, i.e., who should pay the traffic fees and who
should charge and maintain the mobile devices. This could not be solved
within the institutional setting, and the initiative had to be taken over by
a company that offers the service for a fee.
12.5 Conclusions
This paper studied three mobile learning research initiatives in terms of
purpose, implementation, and evolution. The three initiatives regarded
stakeholders differently, and had different strategies to include them in the
development process. An important lesson is to not regard the stakeholder
groups in isolation but to adopt the concept of focus. All the stakeholders
should be considered in each increment, and requirements should be ranked
and prioritized. The more important requirements should be acknowledge
early, and identification and access to the stakeholders, who can pose them
is central for a viable design of a mobile learning initiative. A viable design
built on the notion of flexibility, meaning instead of building layer upon
layer fixating a system structure, the development process should put more
emphasis on understanding stakeholders requirements and work on the integration of the system.
This research should be followed by a study of how the experience gained
from the initiatives studied here affects future initiatives. Is there any
change in how stakeholders are identified and dealt with during the development process, and how did the development process change in itself.
Mobile learning is increasingly in need of the benefits that a knowledge
base in this area promises. Alas, the possibility for more research in line
with this one, which brings together an extensive data set and draw results
based on more than one small-scale study, is sought after. This is mere one
effort to understand and give suggestion on how to adequately address the
problems that development and integration present in term of dealing with
stakeholders and their requirements.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to extend their gratitude towards fellow colleague
Thomas Panas for his valuable feedback concerning this paper.

Publication VII

Publication VII
Sharing Experience from Three
Initiatives in Mobile Learning:
Lessons Learned
Anna Wingkvist
V¨axj¨o University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden
Morgan Ericsson
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
This publication was included in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Computers in Education. Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education,
Hong Kong Institute of Education, Hong Kong, China, 2–4 December 2009. Kong,
S.C., Ogata, H., Arnseth, H.C., Chan, C.K.K., Hirashima, T., Klett, F., Lee,
J.H.M., Liu, C.C., Looi, C.K., Milrad, M., Mitrovic, T., Nakabayashi, K., Wong,
S.L., and Yang, S.J.H. (eds.) ISBN: 978-986-84735-3-9, pp. 613–618.

Abstract
Incorporating knowledge from past experiences is an important
part of any development process, as one has to know what worked
and what did not in order to avoid repeating the same mistakes.
However, many published results in the field of mobile learning
focus on isolated technologies or a specific trial rather than to
reflect on the overall work practice and outcome. Such reflections
can offer maturity to this emerging field of research. This paper
presents reflections gained from three mobile learning initiatives
that are presented in the form of lessons learned. These lessons
learned can serve as considerations for researchers when developing
new initiatives.
Keywords: development process, experience, lessons learned, mobile learning, reflections
13.1 Introduction
The mobile learning community has carried on the core idea of Alan Kay
and the Dynabook (Kay and Goldberg, 1977), and the phrases mobile learning and life-long learning have been coined as an effect. Taylor et al. (2006)
state that mobile learning initiatives are plentiful in numbers and furthermore Kukulska-Hulme et al. (2009) state that in many trials it is suggested
that mobile devices can have a positive contribution to learning and teaching. However, mobile learning has yet to make a substantial impact on
the way we learn and teach in educational institutions of today according
to Traxler and Kukulska-Hulme (2005). Wingkvist (2008) establishes the
notion of sustainability in relation to mobile learning initiatives and state
its importance in regard to successful deployment of mobile learning in an
educational setting. Sustainability can best be described as the ability of a
mobile learning initiative to exist within the organization it was intended
for, and support it and its goals. She further shows that it is imperative
to understand the core implementation, what the technology is supposed to
do, and how it can support the learning experience, before starting a mobile
learning initiative.
An important means to reach sustainability is to make past experiences,
knowledge of what works and what does not work, explicit to the rest of the
research community. Explicit knowledge in published work is an important
source to seek inspiration from when starting new initiatives. While there
are many initiatives within mobile learning and a growing body of research
results, many of the published results focus on small-scale trials and their
outcome. There is a lack of reflection on the outcome and of the reasons
for it (McFarlane et al., 2008). Knowledge based on this type of experience takes time to accumulate and is tough to sum up effectively and in
comprehensible form. Mobile learning need more of these kinds of papers,
specifying experience gained by reflecting on own and others research, and
179
Publication VII: Sharing Experience from Three Initiatives in Mobile Learning
the reasons that they were considered (partial) success stories or failures.
This experience can be summarized informally as for example guidelines or
lessons learned, or more formally as theoretical frameworks or models that
can be used to support the development process.
This paper studies three mobile learning initiatives that the first author
was involved in and formulates lessons learned from this experience. The
lessons learned focus on things considered critical to the (lack of) sustainability of these three initiatives.
13.2 Related Work
The reflections provided in publications are important assets when trying
to understand and learn from other mobile learning initiatives. These kinds
of reflections are valuable but still sparse, and only a few attempts to share
knowledge accumulated from longitudinal experiences in the field of mobile
learning are visible.
Vavoula et al. (2004) offer a set of guidelines, i.e., a theory-informed and
pedagogically sound set of do’s and don’ts, to direct different audiences of
mobile learning, e.g., educational institutions, system designers, and teachers. These can be used as key considerations when starting a mobile learning
initiative.So far, there are ten guidelines originating from their work of reviewing practice. The themes include costs, usability, choice of technology,
roles, equipment management, support for teachers, administration, collaboration, services, and security vs. privacy. A justification for each guideline
is provided in an elaborate discussion, followed by a clear reference to the
specific initiatives it was extracted from.
From examining a number of mobile learning initiatives and describing
the common features, Naismith and Corlett (2006) identified a set of critical
success factors, i.e., availability of technology, institutional support, connectivity, integration, and ownership. These were corroborated by published
results from the 2002–2005 mLearn proceedings. They further state that
the literature is rich with complaints about the challenges facing mobile
learning and hence provided helpful pointers to inform future initiatives.
Vavoula and Sharples (2009) propose that as the field of mobile learning matures and differences are noticed from example Technology-Enhanced
Learning (TEL) and Mobile Human-Computer Interaction (mobileHCI), the
next generation of frameworks and tools need to address the evolving aspects. They have been able to identify from their own experience six aspects
that are expressed as challenges. These are to capture and analyze learning
in context and across contexts, measuring mobile learning processes and outcomes, respecting learner/participant privacy, assessing mobile technology
utility and usability, considering the wider organizational and socio-cultural
context of learning, and address attributes of the environment in terms of
formality and informality respectively.
180
13.3 The Three Mobile Learning Initiatives
13.3 The Three Mobile Learning Initiatives
In this section the three mobile learning initiatives are presented, which the
first author of this paper had access to during the last years, via being a
researcher at CeLeKT, Center for Learning and Knowledge Technologies
at V¨axj¨o University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden, and a visiting researcher at COSC,
the COmputer SCience Research Group at Canterbury University, Christchurch, New Zealand. Each initiative is briefly introduced with aim on
describing the development process.
AMULETS (Kurti et al., 2008) is an initiative that explores how teachers
can develop and implement novel educational scenarios that combines outdoors and indoors activities using mobile technologies combined with stationary desktops. Students are given a number of tasks to complete. The
learning experience is centered on these tasks as well as the extra skills,
for example collaboration and problem solving, needed to accomplish the
tasks. The students use the mobile technologies to access information and
interact with the environment using location i.e., positioning information or
special codes, i.e., semacodes. They can also collaborate with other groups
by sending instant messages and rich media. The devices allow the students
to document the environment by taking photographs and record audio and
video. The recorded data is automatically stored and tagged with location
information so it can be displayed on interactive maps supported by the
Google Maps application. This allows for the discussion and exploration to
continue in the classroom and the data can also be used to support future
outdoors tasks. AMULETS was divided into three trials that took place in
2006 and 2007. The initiative changed throughout the trials. The collaboration changed from between members within a team to between members
within subgroups and between subgroups of a team. The activity changed
from being serial both within a team and between teams to parallel between
the two groups of a team and the different teams. Another change was how
the individuals communicated. In the first trial, everyone could talk to everyone, while the second and third trial relied on messaging and recorded
material.
The Podcast Initiative that took place at Canterbury University, Christchurch, New Zealand, aimed to utilize the inherent mobility of podcasts and
provided supplementary material to a number of courses in various disciplines during 2006 and 2007 (Bell et al., 2007). Podcasting technology was
used to supplement higher education, with audio-only material that students could use to refresh course work while doing other everyday activities
such as household chores, commuting, and exercising. The involved students
were offered supplementary podcasts with varying contents and format, for
example 1-on-1 sound uptakes from lectures, interviews, and question-andanswer sessions. The evolution of the podcast initiative happened in three
stages, with an increase in scope at each stage. At the time the initiative
was initiated podcasting was a common phenomenon. The first stage investigated how known and accepted podcasting was within the student body
181
Publication VII: Sharing Experience from Three Initiatives in Mobile Learning
as well as how many had access to portable digital audio players. Students
were also asked if they would listen to educational podcasts and, if so, which
format they would prefer. The second stage introduced supplementary podcasts for two first-year Computer Science courses. The two courses offered
weekly podcasts. The third stage expanded the number of disciplines that
used podcasts by including courses from Economics, Education, Japanese,
and Music. The initiative also received funding from the university at this
point. The format of the podcasts was similar to the previous stage, i.e.,
both lecture (1-to-1 sound uptake) and supplementary podcasts. The use
of podcasts was evaluated throughout the initiative, primarily by questionnaires. The podcast initiative used a careful, feedback-driven process as it
evolved between the stages. In each stage, feedback was gathered and this
feedback was used to improve upon the current stage and to plan how to
increase the scope while still taking the feedback into account. For example, the insight gained about the format of podcasts from stage two was
preserved as a set of guidelines that were taken into account in stage three.
Skattjakt (Treasure Hunt in English) is a mobile game inspired by treasure
hunt activities and orienteering (Spikol and Milrad, 2008). The initiative
was originally conceived and developed to encourage young people to get
physically active. The game is a mystery, driven by a strong narrative and
the playing field is set across relevant locations. Students playing the game
are divided into teams, and these compete against each other to finish first.
Each team is given a map with locations and each location is a problem
that needs to be solved in order to reveal the next location. An incorrect
answer will result in a penalty, a detour, that will increase the time it
takes for the team to complete the course. Playing the game involves map
reading skills, problem solving, and learning tasks across different domains,
and collaboration within the team. Each team is given a mobile phone
that they use to play the game. The mobile phone displays an interactive
map that players can zoom and pan out on. When a team encounters
a specific destination they enter a code shown there, and the application
running on the phone presents the problem they need to solve. The software
provides audio clues, and the team gives an answer by choosing among
a few alternatives to a question (correct or incorrect) that will reveal a
new location on the interactive map that the team needs to find. The
teams can also document their surroundings by taking photographs and
recording audio and video. The recorded material will automatically be
stored and tagged with location information. The route taken and the
gathered material are presented on an interactive map that can be used for
post activities after the mobile game is finished.
The evolution of Skattjakt can be divided into four stages. The control
of the game content slowly shifted from the research group to the teachers
and students over the four stages. Skattjakt has evolved from the product
of collaboration between researchers and a local orienteering club to something that includes a complete authoring system, allowing anyone to create
content. From an organizational point of view, it has evolved into some182
13.4 Discussion of The Three Mobile Learning Initiatives
thing that can be integrated into an educational institution since content
can be customized and made to suit particular needs and requirements.
13.4 Discussion of The Three Mobile Learning
Initiatives
An analysis of the three initiatives described in Section 2 reveals a number of
areas that influence the outcome. Several of these areas are shared between
all three of the initiatives and these form considerations that might need
to be handled during the development process. In this section the most
important ones are addressed and discussed.
The technology can often be given the main focus of an initiative. There
might even be a need to invent and develop new solutions to solve (technological) problems posed by the initiative. The three initiatives took different
approaches to handle the technology.
The Podcast Initiative relied on existing commercially available solutions and pre-existing portable devices in use by the target group. Both
AMULETS and Skattjakt used custom technical platforms that were developed as part of the initiative. The latter two also used mobile phones
supplied by the research group. Connectivity is closely related to technology and if the learning relies on this, it has to be guaranteed. The
Podcast Initiative faced the problem of students forgetting to download the
material from the server, which in turn introduced a subscription model
for automatic download when connection was present. In AMULETS and
Skattjakt, the custom software provided other ways to work around lack of
connectivity. For example, the game used in Skattjakt could work without
connectivity. For AMULETS the running of several services on the mobile
phones reduced the reliance on connectivity.
Many of the initiatives studied deals with large quantities of produced
data that needs to be managed. For example, the number of available
podcasts will grow quickly and the teams in AMULETS or Skattjakt produce many photos and recordings. All the initiatives had to manage the
data. AMULETS and Skattjakt used systems to automatically tag the content with location information and everything was stored automatically at
a server. The Podcast Initiative used syndication and aggregators to automatically push podcasts to the users devices and to keep track of what
was new or old, listened to or unheard. Podcasts were also categorized by
discipline, course, year, date, and so on.
Scenarios and settings can be an effective way to support the learning.
AMULETS used both the forest and a city square as a setting for the
learning, while Skattjakt used various locations, for example a cottage where
the poet and bishop Esaias Tegn´er (1782–1846) lived for a period, and a
local castle where the former countess Anna Kostkull (1868–1917) returned
as a ghost. If the scenario and settings are used correctly, it can provide a
good way to support the learning, for example by supporting the problems
183
Publication VII: Sharing Experience from Three Initiatives in Mobile Learning
such as measuring the age and height of a tree.
However, if the scenarios do not make sense or do not work within the
learning context they can have the opposite effect. For example, one of the
Skattjakt trials used a game that provided power-up features that made no
sense in the scenario, i.e., players had the ability to sabotage other teams,
but since the teams were spread out, these features turned out to have little
to no effect. The context of the learning, i.e., the environment within the
mobile devices are used to learn in, is important.
The initiatives need to adapt to the context in order to better facilitate
learning. For example, in AMULETS, the teams had to perform different
activities, and the tasks and learning depended on whether it happened
indoors or outdoors. The tasks also depended on locations, with specific
tasks being performed at specific locations. Indoors, outdoors, and actual
location are variables of the context. The Podcast Initiative supplied a
variety of podcasts that were suitable for different contexts. For example,
the 1-to-1 sound uptakes of lectures were suited for when students can read
and take notes. Other formats were more suitable when the students were
traveling or working out and did not have the time to listen to a complete
lecture or deal with notes. Another context variable was the students’
language skills, and the opportunity for non-native English speakers to listen
to lectures over and over.
Effective evaluation strategies can be hard to design. The three initiatives
collected evaluation data but the strategy on how to utilize evaluation as
method and the outcome differed. In AMULETS evaluation was conducted
at the end of trials, using questionnaires to measure the students’ acceptance
of the technology. In Skattjakt, evaluation data was continuously collected
throughout the course of trials i.e., video, interviews, observation sheets,
and questionnaires, which led to a magnitude of data to analyze. This was
strenuous work and part of the solution presented itself by applying codesign, as feedback and change to the initiative is inherent to this process.
The Podcast Initiative relied on survey data, based mostly on questionnaires
but also inherent to the action research approach applied, observations and
interviews are part of the evaluation method.
Any mobile learning initiative has a number of stakeholders, persons or
groups that will be affected by it directly or indirectly. Barker et al. (2005)
identified the following stakeholders: the students, the teaching staff, the
system designers and engineers, device vendors, and the educational institution representatives. The initiatives studied take different approaches
to stakeholders and requirements. Skattjakt uses a very inclusive process,
where some of the stakeholders take the role of co-designers, while the Podcast Initiative used a close feedback loop with constant check-points to
see if the requirements are met and do the necessary changes accordingly.
AMULETS handled stakeholder groups in turn, locked down the requirements before continuing with the initiative and the next round.
184
13.5 Sharing Experience by Lessons Learned
13.5 Sharing Experience by Lessons Learned
As previously mentioned, the experience and hence knowledge extracted
from prior initiatives can be used in several different ways. For example, by
informing other researchers, these can gain an advantage and not “start from
scratch” when undertaking a new initiative in mobile learning. This understanding can be presented in form of new theoretical contributions i.e., the
initiatives presented in this paper and the experience from them has been
used to create a theoretical framework to aid the development process of
new mobile learning initiatives, as described by Wingkvist (2008). Another
means to transfer the knowledge gained is to produce lessons learned, which
can also be used to inform other researchers. The rest of this section studies
how the experience from past initiatives can be crystallized into overarching
lessons learned.
Technical development takes a lot of time and resources. Consider the
implications of technological development, since it alone should not be the
goal of a mobile learning initiative. In the development of a new initiative
we would recommend to use pre-existing technology or to cooperate with
partners who already have a “technical platform”. Using technology available commercially off the shelf can further reduce the time and resource. By
using already existing technology, the focus can be put on using it rather
than developing, which fits the idea of making technology the tool, not the
focal point.
It is not reasonable to expect that all learning activities can happen while
connected. Be aware of connectivity, or implicitly how to function without
it if necessary. There are several mechanisms to allow an “offline mode”.
Data, such as podcasts, can be downloaded to the device ahead of time
using subscription models. In more advanced scenarios, applications can
run on the local devices, and any data captures (audio, video) can be stored
locally and uploaded when there is a connection. Similarly, the various
devices can communicate among each other using ad hoc networks, or use
synchronization to put the data together.
Data management can be an important consideration. A mobile learning initiative might produce large amounts of data, for example podcasts,
photos, and videos, and all of this data should be tagged using semantic
markups, for example location and time. This markup is important for
several reasons, e.g., it allows the data to be categorized and viewed in a
number of different ways, for example in iTunes or using digital maps. This
can later be used in post-activities. Similarly, the semantic markup will
allow for the various synchronizations. Semantic markup and various social
network sites and concepts will allow the students to share the material
among each other as well.
The basic idea of a mobile learning initiative is to “learn by doing”, and
this can be enforced by sound scenarios, i.e., students study the surrounding
environment with a focus on for example forest ecology and history. This
includes disciplines such as biology, geography, and mathematics, and can
185
Publication VII: Sharing Experience from Three Initiatives in Mobile Learning
be carried out in almost any environment with surrounding nature. The
scenario should make a good job of tying the location, the learning experience, and the tasks together that simply “makes sense”. As part of the
scenarios, the learning experience will take place across physical locations,
and often include indoors and outdoors activities. For example, the learning
experience might consist of indoors activities, outdoors activities and briefings, and follow-ups indoors. Sensor readings and semantic tagging such
as time and location can be used to track this information, and provide a
“context” to the learning activity when reviewed during post-activities.
The results of the evaluation of a mobile learning initiative are what can
and will be “judged” by others. It is important to consider the evaluation
and the strategies used in order to make sure that the desired qualities can
be produced. It is important to evaluate the efforts in a thorough way,
and the evaluation methods should be designed before the initiative begins.
Continuous evaluation should be designed and planned and the initiative
should adapt accordingly to the outcome of it. A flexible stance is desired
and the feedback should be used to directly affect the further development
of the initiative.’
Be aware of stakeholders, as a mobile learning initiative has more stakeholders than the obvious teachers and students, even though these can be
seen as the most important. The success and survival is depending on more
stakeholders and identification of these is crucial. All groups of stakeholders should be considered. To be able to transfer the initiative to the care
of the organization it is intended for, a plan for this needs to be in place
specifying the conditions. Dialogue with for example the principal and the
university board early on is very important. One way to include the stakeholders is co-design of for example learning activities. This allows teachers
and students to better integrate the technology and the learning with classroom activities. Co-design can for example be supported by workshops with
stakeholders, researchers, and domain experts (with specific knowledge of
the intended scenarios).
13.6 Conclusions
This paper presents three initiatives in mobile learning with focus on the
experience gained during the development process of these initiatives. In
summary the lessons learned revolves around the basis of technology, spanning over connectivity aspects, and data management arrangements, continuing with scenario building, choice and design of evaluation method, and
cooperation with stakeholders. These types of presentations of reflections
are valuable for researchers to bear in mind when developing new initiatives.
Reflections and lessons learned are inherently work in progress, and will
be continuously explored. Another future effort could be to investigate how
lessons learned are used to transfer experiences between researchers. This
includes how to present them, as well as how experience from different re186
searchers can be systematized and merged giving an invaluable contribution
to support the development process of new initiatives in mobile learning.

Abstract
In this paper we present a survey of published research in mobile learning. We investigated 76 papers from mLearn 2007 and
2008, and classified them according to two dimensions: research
method and research purpose. Research methods and purposes are
important parts of how research is conducted. Alas, opinions and
approaches towards research differ greatly. The classified papers
are evenly distributed among the research methods investigated,
with one exception, being few in Basic research. In terms of research purpose, papers aimed to describe were well represented
while there was a lack of papers targeting evaluation. Papers recounting both Basic research and research done to evaluate are
imperative since they help a research field to mature and also help
researchers to avoid repeating known pitfalls. This maturity, in
turn, will lead to better scalability and sustainability for future
research efforts in the community of mobile learning.
Keywords: method, mobile learning, purpose, review, survey
14.1 Introduction
Naismith et al. (2004) defines mobile learning as mobile technology that
supports learning across locations, or learning that takes advantage of the
opportunities offered by portable technologies. There has been a rapid
growth in research, development, and deployment of mobile learning in recent years (Taylor et al., 2006). This rapid growth has led to a number of
significant activities in schools, workplaces, museums, cities, and rural areas around the world according to Kukulska-Hulme et al. (2009). There is
however a number of identified issues that need further attention (Sharples
et al., 2008). The research conducted in mobile learning is often small scale
and seldom developed into learning aids that are in wide use; hence we
are faced with both limited scale and sustainability (Keegan, 2005). The
field is compelled to evolve and find common ground in order to develop
comprehensive principles and realistic visions, moving beyond specific implementations and branded technologies (Cobcroft et al., 2005). Traxler
and Kukulska-Hulme (2005) conclude that only few of the studies have
been based on sound theory.
Mobile learning is still considered a young research field. The first research publications appeared in the late 1990s and the first international
conference was held in 2001, called the World Conference on Mobile Learning, and in short mLearn. Vavoula and Sharples (2009) state that many of
the influences, and in turn frameworks, methods, and tools have been borrowed from other research fields, such as Technology-Enhanced Learning
and Mobile Human-Computer Interaction. Influences from research fields
such as Computer Supported Collaborative Work and E-learning can also
193
Publication VIII: Current Practice in Mobile Learning
be seen. Many researchers active in the field of mobile learning have backgrounds in Computer Science, Educational Studies, Information Systems,
and Media Technology. The body of researchers includes both academics
and professionals (e.g., educators and software developers.)
A young research field is often highly opportunistic and technology driven.
A primary focus is set on producing solutions and less attention is given to
research methods and the execution of the scientific process. As mobile
learning matures it is necessary to examine how this line of research is being conducted. At the same time we need to understand the impact of the
technology and comprehend the knowledge that is produced. This introduces challenges to all aspects of mobile learning research. Vavoula and
Sharples (2009) state that as the understanding of mobile learning deepens, the “borrowed” frameworks, methods, and tools might no longer be
adequate and need to be processed and evolved. They in turn propose a
framework build on holistic and systematic evaluation divided in three levels of granularity (micro, meso, and macro) to guide the data collection.
Vavoula and Sharples (2009) also noticed that mixed methods are increasingly present in the design of evaluation for mobile learning. This can also
be seen in terms of how the entire research process is conducted. Realizing
and consciously being aware of the spectrum of research methods will, in
the long term, allow us to influence the future direction of the research done
in the field of mobile learning.
Emphasis on research methods and research purposes is important as
these decide how research results are used and interpreted. Methods and
purposes are also important because they help a research community to
be built and allow this community to formally share results, and being an
outlet for knowledge transfer. For instance, Traxler (2007) specifies that
the significant challenges for research in mobile learning lies in scalability
and sustainability, and therefore frameworks, methods, and tools need to
respond to these challenges. Hence, it is necessary to have a thorough
understanding of the fit between the approach chosen and the goal of the
research. Wingkvist and Ericsson (2009) suggest careful scaling according
to pre-set specifications to increase the sustainability of research initiatives
in mobile learning.
Discussing research methods and purposes is an integral and intricate
part of scientific conduct. Initiators of this discussion were Wynekoop
and Conger (1990), followed by Kjeldskov and Graham (2003), and later
Jensen and Skov (2005). The classification schema presented within these
papers demonstrates an usable and straightforward approach to enhance
the discussion of research methods. In order to survey methods and purposes, the World Conference on Mobile Learning (mLearn) was selected as
a prime subject for the appreciated publications accredited to mobile learning. The mLearn conference represents current practice conducted within
mobile learning and highlights how research is carried out.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows, having this introduction followed by a presentation of eight well-established research methods and four
194
14.2 Research Methods
research purposes. These provide the two dimensions of our survey, allowing
us to review and discuss the results. We then present the classification and
an interpretation of the results, and ending the paper with conclusions.
14.2 Research Methods
In this section we present the eight research methods, including their weaknesses, strengths, and primary use in mobile learning research. The research
methods are extracted from Wynekoop and Conger (1990) with supplementary input from references on research methods prominent in Information
Systems (due to first author’s background and main area of expertise). The
methods considered are Case studies, Field studies, Action research, Experiment studies, Survey research, Applied research, Basic research, and
Normative research. Research methods often overlap, so we emphasize the
defining characteristics of each of the methods to show the classification of
existing papers.
The eight research methods are environment dependent, artificial, or environment independent (Benbasat, 1985). The first three methods, Case
studies, Field studies, and Action research are used in a natural (real) setting and are environment dependent, while Experiments are carried out in
a somewhat artificial setting. The remaining four (Survey, Applied, Basic,
and Normative research) are all environment independent (but not artificial). This categorization of the eight methods is summarized in Table 14.1.
Case Studies
Case Studies according to Yin (2003) are an example of an empirical enquiry
that investigates a contemporary phenomenon within its real life context,
especially when the boundaries between phenomenon and context are not
evident. In respect of the researcher the boundary from the phenomena
is distinct as the researcher is a passive and independent outsider. Case
studies are often intensive evaluations of small size entities such as groups,
organizations, individuals, systems, or tools.
In general the data is collected by a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods such as observations, interviews, and questionnaires, with
limited experimental or statistical control imposed. This often results in a
complicated analysis, as the data collected in a natural setting is by default
very rich and sometimes conflicting or incoherent. Case studies are on the
other hand particularly well suited for research focusing on describing and
explaining a specific phenomenon and for developing hypothesis or theory.
However, case studies can be very time demanding and the findings hard to
generalize upon. In mobile learning, case studies could be used to provide
rich data explaining phenomena involving the use of mobile devices in a
specific context.
195
Publication VIII: Current Practice in Mobile Learning
Method Strengths Weaknesses Use
Environment
dependent
setting
Case studies Process understanding Costly, time demanding Descriptions
Demonstrate causality Limited generalizability Explanations
Natural setting No experimental control General hypotesis
Rich data
Field studies Natural setting Difficult data collection Studying current practice
Independent variables manipulation
Unknown sample bias Evaluating new practice
Replicable No experimental control Post hoc study of processes and outcomes in
practice
No guarantee of independent variable variation
Generating Hypothesis
Action
research
First hand experience Ethics consideration Generating hypothesis/theory
Applying theory to practice
Researcher bias Testing theories/hypothesis
Close relationship with
subjects
Time demanding
Unknown generalizability
Artificial setting
Experiment
studies
Control of variables Limited realism Controlled experiments
Replicable Unknown generalizability Testing theory/product
Environment
independent
setting
Survey
research
Relatively easy, low cost Context insensitive Collectinv data from large
samples
Can reduce sample bias No variable manipulation Providing statistic picture
Developing hypothesis
Testing relationships between factors
Descriptive data collection
Applied
research
The goal is a product
which may be evaulated
Solution constrained Product development
May need further design
to make product general
Goal-oriented hypothesis
testing
Testing hypothesis/concepts
Basic research
No restrictions on soltuions
Costly, time demanding Building theory
Solve new problems May produce no solution Solving new problems
Solution may not match
known problems
Normative
research
Insight into firsthand experience
Opinions may influense
outcome
Descriptions of practice
Basis for other forms of research
Building frameworks
Informing and teaching
concepts
Table 14.1: Summary of Research Methods (adapted from Wynekoop and
Conger (1990))
196
14.2 Research Methods
Field studies
Field studies are characterized by taking place in a natural setting, allowing the researcher a flexible stance in respect to variables, the degree of
and manipulation of the same. However, as control increases over variables
the pragmatism decreases. Using a range of qualitative and quantitative
approaches, data is collected often through observations and interviews,
supporting the study of complex situated interactions and processes as addressed by Klein and Myers (1999). The phenomena are placed in a social
and cultural context. The advantage is the corpus of data, realistically
extracted, and in relatively short time period. The disadvantages are unknown biases, extensive data collection, and having no guarantee that the
data is representative. In relation to mobile learning, field studies could be
applied in current practice for either informing design or understanding the
mobility of users, evaluating design or theory by conducting research in a
realistic setting.
Action research
Action research is particularly suited to application in an actual and natural setting; that is to study social and cultural phenomena. According to
Baskerville and Myers (2004) the researcher actively participates in solving a problem while at the same time evaluating the results and making a
knowledge contribution at large. For example, it allows the introduction,
transformation, evaluation, and extraction of theories.
The advantage of being so engaged in the activity facilitates first-hand understanding and supports the learning process for all those involved. However, the disadvantage is that it can be very time consuming, and since
the researcher takes part in the phenomena studied, remaining at a critical
stance can be hard. Even though the outcome is attached uniquely to the
research conducted, it does offer a degree of external validity since others
can interpret the theoretical contribution made. Nevertheless it can still be
difficult to generalize upon. In relation to mobile learning, action research
provides the perfect opportunity for a researcher to jointly collaborate with
the “team”.
Experiment Studies
Experiment Studies are characterized by the researcher’s ability to control
dependent variables often by creating an artificial setting or situation. Being
able to do this is prohibitively difficult or even impossible and a researcher
often resorts to quasi-experiment studies as presented by Denscombe (1998).
These usually take place in uncontrolled environments, variables from undetected sources are neither measured nor held constant, and these may
produce misleading correlations between variables under study. Data can
be collected depending on the style of the subsequent analysis desired.
The major advantages of experiment studies are the opportunity to focus
on specific phenomena of interest and a large degree of control in terms of
manipulation of variables before and during the study through for example
197
Publication VIII: Current Practice in Mobile Learning
assignment of test subjects and exposure to different treatment variables.
Also, well designed and executed experiment studies are highly replicable
and facilitate data collection. Disadvantages include limited connection to
the real world and an unknown level of generalizability of the results outside
of the specific setting. In mobile learning research, experiment studies are
suitable for evaluating design ideas, specific products, or theories about
design and user interaction in controlled environments with little or no
interference from the outside world.
Survey research
Survey research provides information from a defined population and the
data, which is gathered directly through, e.g., interviews, publications, and
questionnaires, is assumed to be independent to the environment as stated
by Fowler (2002). In essence, data from survey research is collected without
the researcher’s intervention or stake other than the gathering of data. Data
is most often analyzed quantitatively, but data from interview surveys can
also be analyzed qualitatively.
The advantages are that they facilitate large amounts of data to be gathered with relatively little effort, supporting broad generalization of results.
Also a high level of control regarding sample subjects makes reduction of
bias possible thus increasing validity. However, a disadvantage is that it suffers from providing only snapshots of studied phenomena and relies heavily
on the subjective views of respondents. In respect to mobile learning, survey
research could, for example, facilitate general information being gathered
about user needs and requirements, or of a phenomenon, and from this
develop an understanding of the current situation.
Applied Research
Applied Research is similar to prototyping and based on a trial-and-error
practice relying on the expertise and reasoning of the researcher’s capabilities through intuition, experience, deduction, and induction. The outcome
is known in terms of requirements, but not the method of obtaining the
same as mentioned by J¨arvinen (2004). In line with this goal orientation,
the advantage is that some kind of result being produced, and can be evaluated against the pre-set goal. The disadvantages are that the initial goal
may be very limited and not generalizable, and that appropriate solutions
for accomplishing the desired outcome may not be produced at all. Applied
research is relevant for mobile learning in relation to design and implementation of systems, interfaces and techniques, which meet certain requirements
for performance, user interaction, user satisfaction, etc.
Basic Research
Basic research allows the researcher to study well-known problems to which
methods or possible solutions are yet to be identified. The aim is to find
out what is part of reality and often the researcher is concerned with the
198
14.3 Research Purposes
development of a new theory (J¨arvinen, 2004). The approach is also trialand-error based, riding on the competence of the researcher. The advantage
is the directness of the research that is facilitated by the open choice of
approaches and time, allowing a high level of creativity in the search for
methods. The down side is that it can be very time consuming and there
is no guarantee that a solution will eventually be produced. In relation to
mobile learning, basic research may be applied to the development of theoretical frameworks for understanding fundamental principles, for example
issues related to mobility or for identifying new problems related to learning
while users are on the move.
Normative Research
Normative research is less rigorous in terms of research method per se
though usually address interesting phenomena from a pragmatic standpoint.
This is done in order to stimulate and indicate directions for future research,
and for example covers writings of application descriptions, idea, concept,
and suggestion development (Tolvanen et al., 1996). The narratives often
seem intuitively correct but are not based on theory or research rigorously
conducted, and are presented according to the style of a practitioner, i.e.,
giving a subjective view and focus on what worked in that particular situation.
The advantage is that this kind of writing is more straightforward and often perceived easier to produce compared to presenting complex theoretical
contributions. Drawbacks consist of limited theoretical foundation, weak
methodological reflection, and low generalizability. However, the ones that
reach the stage of publication often provide well-prepared arguments with
considerable backing from other sources. For mobile learning, the papers
describing general statements or designs, and procedures that worked well
or did not prove successful, are representative.
14.3 Research Purposes
In this section the research purpose is defined as the second dimension of
the survey. The purpose of a research effort is closely linked to the research method used and vice versa, so these two notions make an excellent
pair when attempting to classify mobile learning papers. The definitions of
the four research purposes are inspired by Wynekoop and Conger (1990),
although a slight refinement was made. The original categories were: Understanding/Describing, Engineering, Re-engineering, and Evaluating. We
divided Understanding/Describing into two categories and merged Engineering and Re-engineering into one category called Developing. These
changes were done first to differentiate between Understanding and Describing in order to sharpen the categorization in respect of each other, and
secondly to merge the other two because mobile learning application and
framework have not been around long enough to fully use the categoriza199
Publication VIII: Current Practice in Mobile Learning
tion of re-engineering. In lieu of this the categories for research purposes
are: Describing, Developing, Understanding, and Evaluating. These four
research purposes are explained and defined here:
Describing refers to writings that describe the unit under study,
such as features of the portrayed environment, the
technical implementation, often represented in models of low level of abstraction. Describing papers provide knowledge about the research in a straightforward manor with emphasis on actual results.
Developing refers to writings that define frameworks, be it technical or theoretical, and emphasis on development
and the presentation of solutions. A typical example
is when the aim is to develop a new conceptual model
or a prototype, i.e., papers that basically provide first
hand knowledge in uncharted territory.
Understanding refers to writings that seek to understand and make
sense of conducted research, while trying to bridge
the result into a theoretical frame, often present new
constructs based on identifying and enhancing theory. Understanding papers provide knowledge of a
wider theoretical setting, often found in research that
is in the process of rethinking something.
Evaluating refers to writings that evaluate the usefulness, benefits and shortcomings of the research, while hopefully giving pointers to other researchers. These papers can be seen as evaluating methods and purposes
in practice and reflecting upon these, i.e., provide
knowledge about lessons learned, which can give a
head start or at least the possibility to avoid pitfalls.
These four categories of purpose along with the methods are used in the
next section as a basis for classifying mobile learning research papers from
two World Conferences on Mobile Learning, mLearn 2007 and mLearn 2008.
14.4 Classification of Mobile Learning Research
The proceedings of mLearn 2007 (Norman and Pearce, 2007) and mLearn
2008 (Traxler et al., 2008) were selected to get a picture of current practice in mobile learning. Traxler (2007) proclaims that the mobile learning
community is currently visible mainly through dedicated international conference series, of which mLearn is the most prestigious, rather than through
200
14.4 Classification of Mobile Learning Research
any journals. The mLearn conference series is renowned for including contributions from academics as well as practitioners. All the 76 full papers
from mLearn 2007 and 2008 were classified. The papers are numbered in
the order they are printed in the conference proceedings with the first paper
from mLearn 2007 as paper #1 and the first paper from mLearn 2008 as
paper #39 (cf. Appendix). The data set as defined by Robson (2002) is
the set of papers from mLearn 2007 and mLearn 2008, which provides a
solid and adequately representative basis for this survey. Each paper was
peer reviewed, which indicated that the published papers are of good quality and of importance to the community. 76 such papers is a relevant and
sufficiently large sample to draw conclusions from.
Initially the first author reviewed all papers. Each paper was thoroughly
read with particular focus on identifying the purpose of the presented research as well as the method applied to accomplish the research. Many
papers can be classified as having a number of purposes or methods, but
the most coherent and dominant from each category were selected to classify the paper according to the two dimensions, respectively. Moreover,
an international master’s student repeated the same classification process.
The results of the two classifications were compared and a final decision was
made for each paper. This decision was then discussed and collaborated by
the second author, who now also read all the papers. The complete survey
result of the 76 papers is presented in Table 14.2, including the total share
of each category in percentage.
Table 14.2 shows that the most commonly used method within mobile
learning research is Case studies, with 24% (18 out of 76) of the papers. The
second most used method is Normative research, which 21% or 16 out of 76
papers used. Applied research and Survey research are also commonly used;
the former was used by 17% of the papers while the latter was used by 14%.
Of the less generally used methods, Field studies and Experiment studies
are more common, with 9%, and 8% respectively, while Action research was
used by 5% of the papers. Only one paper was classified as Basic research.
The classification shows that environmental independent research (Survey,
Basic, Applied, and Normative research) dominates and was used by 54% of
the papers. 38% use environment dependent methods (Case studies, Field
studies, and Action research) and focus on studying real use in a natural
setting. 8% of the papers use an artificial setting (Experiment studies).
In environmental independent research, Normative research was the most
common method, closely followed by Applied research (39% respectively
31%). Case study dominated the environment dependent methods and was
used by 62% of the papers. By definition, 100% of the artificial research
used Experiment research.
201
Publication VIII: Current Practice in Mobile Learning Case studies Field studies Action research Experiment studies Survey research Basic research Applied research Normative research Total (in %) Describing 1, 3, 6, 11, 22, 29, 32, 37, 40, 45, 50, 66, 70 2, 12, 28, 39, 59 49, 54, 71 16, 17, 27, 31, 73 8, 38, 41, 53, 76 5, 15, 24, 34, 56 4, 9, 19, 23, 25, 33 55.26% Developing 10 57 13 69 7, 20, 21, 26, 36, 46, 60 14, 18, 43, 44, 51, 52, 68 23.68% Understanding 55, 58, 67, 74 47 64 42, 48, 63, 65 35 72, 75 17.11% Evaluating 62 30 61 3.95% Total (in %) 23.68% 9.21% 5.26% 7.89% 14.47% 1.32% 17.11% 21.05% 100.00% Table 14.2: Classification of Mobile Learning Research Papers.
202
14.4 Classification of Mobile Learning Research
54 % 38 %
8 %
Artificial Dependent Independent
Case studies
Field studies
Action research
Experiment studies
Survey research
Basic research
Applied research
Normative research
0 % 7.50 % 15.00 % 22.50 % 30.00 %
Figure 14.1: Papers Divided by Environment (left) and Method (right) in
Percentage.
In Figure 14.1 the papers are first divided by environment and secondly
by method to show the number and percentage that cover each category.
The most common purpose of the research was to describe the study (Describing), with 55% (42 of 76). This was followed by Developing and Understanding, 24% (18 of 76) and 17% (13 of 76), respectively. Only 4% (3
of 76) of the papers had Evaluating as their research purpose. Research
with the purpose of Describing most commonly used Case study as the research method. This was used by 31% of the Describing papers. The rest of
the Describing papers were almost equally distributed among Experiment,
Survey, Applied, and Normative research (12% for the first three, 14% for
the last), while 7% of the papers used Action research. The papers with
a purpose of Developing usually used Applied or Normative research, and
78% (39% each) of all the Developing papers used either of those two methods. The remaining 22% were equally divided between Case study, Field
study, Experiment study, and Survey research. The Understanding papers
were most commonly either Case studies or Survey research (31% each).
The remaining papers used Field studies, Action research, or Basic research
(8% each). The three Evaluating papers were divided into using Survey
research, Applied research, or Normative research.
The Case study research method was most commonly used for the Describing purpose. 72% of the Case study papers fall within this purpose.
Similar results hold for Field studies, Action research, and Experiment studies, where 71%, 75%, and 83% of the use of these methods is done with the
purpose of Describing. The remaining methods, apart from Basic Research,
are generally used for two purposes, e.g., Survey research is most commonly
done either for Describing or Understanding, with 45% and 36% respectively.
Within mobile learning there is a tendency towards research in an independent environment aiming at Describing and Developing. In the environmental dependent category Case study dominates with 62% (18 papers)
and for all the 29 papers in that whole category, 21 papers have the purpose
of Describing. Understanding (and presenting theoretical framework) is the
focus of 13 papers (17%), which limits the body of knowledge for mobile
203
Publication VIII: Current Practice in Mobile Learning
learning. Of the 13 papers of Applied research, 93% do so for the purpose
of Developing and Understanding. Of the 6 papers in the Experiment category, 83% (5 papers) use this method for Describing purposes. Of the 7
papers that report Field studies, 5 papers use this method for Describing
purpose, while 2 papers use it for a Developing and Understanding purpose,
respectively. Applied and Normative research is most commonly used for
Describing or Developing. In the case of Applied research, 38% of the papers utilizing this method are Describing, while 54% are Developing. In the
case of Normative research, 38% are Describing, while 44% are Developing.
The sole paper that used Basic research used it for Understanding.
14.5 Discussion
This section presents an analysis of the results of the classification presented
in the previous section. Generally, the research conducted is either close to
one situation in particular, gathering empirical data, or on a normative
level presenting ways to utilize the essence of mobile learning in an abstract
sense. These two represent opposite ends of the spectrum given method
choice and purpose and out of the 76 papers considered in this survey, 51
papers fall into either of these (67%). This proves the need for a broader
scope in terms of methods and purposes to help the research field to mature
and also help researchers to avoid repeating known pitfalls. This maturity,
in turn, will lead to better scalability and sustainability for future research
efforts in the community of mobile learning.
Mobile learning is evidently an interdisciplinary field with ties to for example Computer Science, something that might explain the emphasis on
Applied research and data gathering. Methods used in related fields, e.g.,
Information Systems and Software Engineering are also noticeable within
mobile learning, for instance with Action research, Case studies, and Field
studies. A difference compared to these related disciplines, however, is the
lack of artificial environments and Experiment studies found in this review of
the papers. From the 76 papers, only 6 presented some kind of Experiment
studies. In some of the related fields, experiments are more common, for example Kjeldskov and Graham (2003) show that Experiment studies is the
second most common research method used in Mobile Human-Computer
Interaction. This divergence may be a result of the difficulty to emulate
aspects of mobile learning, such as mobility and the dynamics of context
changes in an experimental setup. Field study, on the other hand, offers
an ideal opportunity for the study of rich real-world cases. Mobile learning
is applicable and well understood in a natural and environment dependent
setting. The use of research methods such as Case study and Action research aids and strengthens the result when studies are conducted. Mobile
learning researchers could learn from other disciplines that have struggled
with the study of similar phenomena often depending on the degree of involvement from the researcher. Experimental studies and the use of control
204
14.5 Discussion
groups are subsequently essential.
The prevalence to gather empirical data and the research that is conducted to describe a phenomenon shows a strong connection to real-world
cases. Much of the research conducted is done to describe how the real world
works and is often presented as the result of a small-scale study where a
population used mobile learning technology. This data is presented, not
interpreted, and offered as a description of the process. On the other end
of the spectrum there is the normative research that is also done with the
purpose to describe and develop. Many of the papers that fall into this
category present either a description of a current situation or a future situation describing what may happen or how something should be developed.
These papers are based on some evidence and are generally visionary. Between these two, Basic research, and Evaluating research is expected, but
not found. Out of the papers reviewed, 4 fall into either of these categories,
none in both.
There is a distinct lack of Evaluating and Basic research among the papers
reviewed. The one paper we found in Basic research is mirrored in the survey
of Jensen and Skov (2005) that also only found one such paper in relation to
their field (Children’s Technology Design). Many of the papers include an
attempt at reflection. This is often not the purpose and almost always leads
to the evaluation from an end-user perspective. There is little reflection by
revisiting results, or evaluation of the effort compared to other efforts. This
is a problem. In a similar manner, much of the research is done to describe,
not understand or evaluate. This may indicate a lack of maturity, a lack of
a clear definition of the field. There is still a need to describe how it works
in order to define it. There is a need to bridge the gap between descriptive
small- scale research and normative visionary research, by evaluating and
trying to understand. This is where the knowledge is produced and theories
are formed.
One reason for the lack of Evaluating and Basic research might be the
speed in which mobile technologies are developed and improved upon. A
generation of mobile devices is short-lived, which may result in many technical aspects being lost when a new generation is introduced or many studies
feeling outdated and old, which in turn may affect evaluations and reflections. This lends well to simply stating facts or presenting visionary plans.
However, without proper focus on the research process, including methods
and purposes, it is hard for research in mobile learning to transfer already
obtained knowledge into the starting point for new efforts.
One way to describe the papers reviewed is to consider some of them as
standing on the frontiers looking into the future and others working hard
to keep up with the development. A challenge for mobile learning research
would be to stop, turn around, and reflect over the results once again. This
is the way to reach the visionary future, which is predicted by looking ahead
avoiding already known pitfalls. Also, a head start is given if research is
built upon previous research instead if the wheel is reinvented every time a
new mobile learning initiative gets on its way.
205
Publication VIII: Current Practice in Mobile Learning
Given this review it must be stated that research methods and a classification of research according to defined methods is not an exact science.
Some definitions can be considered vague or even overlapping with other
methods. To make issues even more complicated, few papers contain a discussion of the exact methods used, so in many cases it is up to judgment
calls. With the overlapping and vague methods it was sometimes hard to
pick one, and only one, method. For example, is a study conducted in a
natural setting but with all variables fixed a Field study or an Experiment?
Further along these lines, it should be acknowledged that the survey presented in this paper has some limitations. It can for example be discussed
if the research papers presented at a conference although marketed central
to the field is really representative of the research and activities that are
conducted within the field. Furthermore, it is not always easy to compress
the research to fit the page limitations or topics of interest at a conference.
The conference series selected for this review provides papers from a wide
range of researchers and research projects. The authors read each paper
several times, and carefully discussed the method and the purpose before
it was classified. However, the purposes and methods matrix, as classification tool, has been used for a number of similar publications. Further, the
results of the classification in this paper show a clear trend that is difficult
to attribute to vague method definitions. Based on these observations, the
authors of this paper are confident that the research conducted is of value,
even with the limitations placed on it.
14.6 Conclusions
Research methods and research purposes are an integral and intricate part of
how people conduct research. In this paper we presented a two dimensional
matrix where we compared research methods and research purposes in a
selection of 76 papers. The first dimension consists of eight research methods: Case study, Field study, Action research, Experiment, Survey, Applied
research, Basic research, and Normative research. The second dimension
consists of four research purposes: Describing, Developing, Understanding,
and Evaluating. The 76 papers we investigated represent a broad selection
within current practices in mobile learning.
Our classification shows an even distribution in respect to research methods, with only Basic research being under- represented. In terms of research
purposes, Describing is the most frequent used within more than half of the
papers, followed by one-fourth of Developing papers, and one-fifth Understanding. Evaluating, on the other hand, is represented only within about
one-twentieth of the total amount of papers we have investigated. Our survey reveals that there is a clear lack of Basic research and Evaluating papers.
This obviously indicates a void that could be filled with publications specifying lessons that were learned, describing benefits as well as shortcoming
of research already conducted.
206

